Characterisation of most mutations found in CLCN2 in patients with CC2L leukodystrophy show that they cause a reduction in function of the chloride channel ClC-2.
GlialCAM, a regulatory subunit of ClC-2 in glial cells and involved in the leukodystrophy megalencephalic leukoencephalopathy with subcortical cysts (MLC), increases the activity of a ClC-2 mutant by affecting ClC-2 gating and by stabilising the mutant at the plasma membrane.
We suggest that leukodystrophy-causing CLCN2 mutations reduce the functional expression of ClC-2, which is partly counteracted by GlialCAM/MLC1-mediated increase in the gating and stability of the channel.
The review then discusses the diseases associated with ClC-2, including degeneration of the retina, Sjoegren's syndrome, age-related cataracts, degeneration of the testes, azoospermia, lung cancer, constipation, repair of impaired intestinal mucosa barrier, leukemia, cystic fibrosis, leukoencephalopathy, epilepsy and diabetes mellitus.
A subset of these genes has been implicated in other neurobehavioral disorders including depression (SLIT3), epilepsy (CLCN2, PRICKLE1), intellectual disability (AP4M1), schizophrenia (WDR60), and Tourette syndrome (OFCC1).
Epilepsy with grand mal on awakening (EGMA) is a well-defined subtype of idiopathic generalized epilepsy.
Additionally, using global gene expression analysis of partially reprogrammed cells, we identified SNAI3 as a novel invasion-related marker in human melanoma.
SNAI3 expression correlates with tumor thickness in primary melanomas and thus, may be of prognostic value.
Effective silencing of Runx2 by short interfering RNA (siRNA) demonstrated downregulation of EMT-related molecules (SNAI2, SNAI3 and TWIST1), MMP2 and vasculogenic factors (VEGFA and VEGFC) in thyroid carcinoma cells.
Thyroid-stimulating hormone levels, goiter and thyroid dysfunction were higher in children who were anti-TPO1 than in diabetic children without thyroid autoimmunity.
Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) can be used to detect rearrangements that cause Alfa-thalassemia, particularly large deletions involving the whole Alfa cluster and/or deletions in the HS-40 region.
In addition to the -Alfa3.7 deletion identified in the patients with Hb H disease, four different Alfa0 deletions removing 15 to 225 kb DNA segments were found: two of them remove both the Alfa genes, one affects only the regulatory element (HS-40) region, and another one extends over the entire Alfa cluster and the HS-40 region.
The impact of urinary VDBP and KIM-1 on MARE was independent of known CIN risk factors such as anemia, preexisting renal failure, preexisting heart failure, and diabetes.
The data show that a tandem Maf recognition element (MARE) in locus control region (LCR) hypersensitive site 2 (HS2) reveals a remarkably high degree of occupancy during differentiation of mouse erythroleukemia cells.
Targeting of an artificial zinc finger DNA-binding domain (ZF-DBD) to the HS2 tandem MARE caused a reduction in the association of MARE-binding proteins and transcription complexes at LCR HS2 and the adult Betamajor-globin gene promoter but did not affect expression of the Betaminor-globin gene.
The data demonstrate that a stable MARE-associated footprint in LCR HS2 is important for the recruitment of transcription complexes to the adult Betamajor-globin gene promoter during erythroid cell differentiation.
Next, we demonstrate that CD172a(+)Slan DCs that produced IL-1Beta and TNF-Alfa accumulated in mLNs and colons of CD patients.
In conclusion, we propose that proinflammatory CD14(bright)CD172a(+)Slan DCs are a distinguishing feature between CD and UC, as these cells accumulate uniquely in mLNs and colonic mucosa of CD patients.
Here, we show that CD172a(+)CD11c(+) cells accumulate in the mesenteric lymph nodes (mLNs) and inflamed intestinal mucosa in patients with Crohn's disease (CD).
An avidity-improved CD47 fusion protein (CD47-Var1) suppresses the release of a wide array of inflammatory cytokines by CD172a(+) cells, which may include HLA-DR(-)CD172a(+) neutrophils, in inflamed colonic explant cultures and impairs the ability of HLA-DR(+)CD172a(+) cells to activate memory Th17 but not Th1 responses in mLNs.
We first show that mucosal CD103(-) DCs selectively express SIRPalpha and that their frequency was augmented in the lamina propria and mLNs of mice that developed Th17-biased colitis in response to trinitrobenzene sulfonic acid.
CD47 expression was required on the SIRPalpha(+)CD103(-) DCs for efficient trafficking to mLNs in vivo, whereas it was dispensable on both DCs and T cells for Th17 polarization in vitro.
Effects of Ca2+ and calmodulin on the adenylate cyclase activity of a prolactin and growth hormone-producing pituitary tumor cell strain (GH3) were examined.
The control of PTG hyperplasia is most important in the management of secondary hyperparathyroidism (SHPT), because the advanced stage of hyperplasia is considered irreversible.
Control of secondary hyperparathyroidism (SHPT) using active vitamin D analogues becomes difficult in advanced SHPT, because the enlarged parathyroid glands (PTGs) are resistant to medical therapy.
The long-term effect of cinacalcet hydrochloride treatment on parathyroid gland (PTG) volume has been scarcely investigated in patients with moderate to advanced secondary hyperparathyroidism (SHPT).
It has been suggested that microRNA-9 (miR-9) is associated with the development of knee osteoarthritis (OA).
X-linked hypophosphatemia (XLH), autosomal dominant HR (ADHR), and autosomal recessive HR (ARHR) are examples of hereditary forms of HR, which are mainly caused by mutations in the phosphate regulating endopeptidase homolog, X-linked (PHEX), FGF23, and, dentin matrix protein-1 (DMP1) and ecto-nucleotide pyro phosphatase/phosphodiesterase 1 (ENPP1) genes, respectively.
Homozygous inactivating mutations in DMP1 (dentin matrix protein 1), the gene encoding a noncollagenous bone matrix protein expressed in osteoblasts and osteocytes, cause autosomal recessive hypophosphatemia (ARHP).
An autosomal recessive form of hypophosphatemia (ARHP) was recently shown to be caused by homozygous mutations in DMP1, the gene encoding dentin matrix protein-1 (DMP-1), a non-collagenous bone matrix protein with an important role in the development and mineralization of bone and teeth.
Among various causes of low serum phosphorous are inherited disorders associated with increased urinary excretion of phosphate, including autosomal dominant hypophosphatemic rickets (ADHR), X-linked hypophosphatemia (XLH), autosomal recessive hypophosphatemia (ARHP), and hereditary hypophosphatemic rickets with hypercalciuria (HHRH).
Recently, positional cloning approaches furthermore led to the identification of homozygous inactivating mutations in dentin matrix protein 1 (DMP1) as the cause of an autosomal recessive form of hypophosphatemia.
Pharmacological treatment of SOD1(G37R) mice with minocycline, a compound that attenuates microgliosis and slows down disease, lessened the dysregulation of Cdk5/Cdk4 and the phosphorylation of Rb.
Seventeen molecules, including transcription factor E2F, T-cell-specific transcription factor, Src (known as "proto-oncogene tyrosine-protein kinase of sarcoma"), interferon regulatory factor 1, thymidylate synthase, cyclin B, cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) 4, CDK, caspase-1, vitamin D receptor, histone deacetylase, MAPK/ERK kinase, bcl-2-associated X protein, runt-related transcription factor 1, PR domain zinc finger protein 1, platelet-derived growth factor receptor, and interleukin 1, were identified as candidate molecules.
Therefore, targeting the caspase-1/PPARGamma/MCAD pathway might be a promising therapeutic approach to prevent tumor progression.Tumor associated macrophages (TAMs) promote cancer progression.
Here, the author show that caspase-1 promotes TAMs differentiation by attenuating medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase activity and that inhibition of this axis results in suppression of tumour growth in a transgenic mouse model of breast cancer.
Ensuing western blotting or immunostaining results showed that Rictor/mTORC2 signaling was activated in kidney interstitial myofibroblasts from mice with unilateral ureteral obstruction.
Compared with control littermates, the kidneys of Rictor knockout mice developed less interstitial extracellular matrix deposition and inflammatory cell infiltration at 1 or 2 weeks after ureteral obstruction.
Less progression of Hoffa-synovitis and effusion-synovitis was observed in the TG-C group compared to placebo (9.6% vs. 21.1%, adjusted RR 0.5, 95%CI [0.2,1.2], p = 0.115).
Intraarticular treatment with TG-C showed fewer patients in the treated group with progression in structural OA features and other MRI-defined inflammatory markers such as Hoffa-synovitis and effusion-synovitis.
A total of 104 patients (89.4% females) fulfilling the 1990 ACR criteria for FMS and the Rome III criteria for IBS classification and 125 unrelated age- and sex-matched IBS patients without FMS underwent the following studies: haematological, coagulation and biochemistry tests, serological and genetic markers for CD (i.e., tissue transglutaminase 2 (tTG-2) and major histocompatibility complex HLA-DQ2/HLA-DQ8), multiple gastric and duodenal biopsies, FMS tender points (TPs), Fibromyalgia Impact Questionnaire (FIQ), Health Assessment Questionnaire (HAQ), 36-Item Short Form Health Survey (SF-36) and Visual Analogue Scales (VASs) for tiredness and gastrointestinal complaints.
GFD effectiveness was assessed at baseline and after 1 year, examining the score changes in the Tender Points (TPs) test, Fibromyalgia Impact Questionnaire (FIQ), Health Assessment Questionnaire (HAQ), Short Form Health Survey (SF-36), Visual Analogue Scales (VAS) for gastrointestinal complaints, pain and tiredness, drug prescriptions and tissue-Trans-Glutaminase (tTG) serum levels.
Non-organ specific AAb (ANA, anti-Ro52, anti-Ro60, anti-La, anti-RNP) but not anti-thyroid peroxidase, anti-tissue transglutaminase or myositis-specific antibodies, were more frequent in s-IBM patients, and 14/51 (27%) had another autoimmune disease (Sjoegren's syndrome, thyroiditis, psoriasis, vitiligo).
By applying CD146 and CD105 antibodies on human retinas from glaucomatous eyes, CD146-positive retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) were found, some being placed in perivascular positions; ongoing processes of neurites extension were related to these neurons.
These results support the hypothesis that in glaucoma eyes the CD146-positive RGCs result from regenerative processes driven by stem cells in the retinal perivascular niches.
CD146/MCAM and CD166/ALCAM, previously unreported in cells from fvERMs, were also expressed.
Two new and potentially promising melanocytic markers, microphthalmia transcription factor (MiTF) and melanoma cell adhesion molecule (Mel-CAM), have been shown to be sensitive markers of epithelioid melanoma, but have not been tested in desmoplastic/spindle cell melanoma or in other rare melanocytic neuroectodermal tumors such as clear cell sarcoma.
We investigated the effect of carnosine as an adjuvant therapy on urinary albumin excretion (UAE), the tubular damage marker alpha 1-microglobulin (A1M), and oxidative stress in pediatric patients with type 1 diabetes and nephropathy.
The following parameters were measured in 377 patients with type 2 diabetes: HbA1c, serum concentrations of 1,5-AG, GA and creatinine, hemoglobin, urinary albumin/creatinine ratio, and urinary excretion of Alfa1 -microglobulin (A1M).
Vonoprazan Fumarate (TAK-438F) is a new and effective drug approved in Japan in 2014 for treatment and prevention of acid-related diseases (ARDs), which exhibits many advantages compared with traditional proton-pump inhibitors (PPIs).
In many countries, the introduction of generic proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) onto the pharmaceutical market increased the phenomenon of therapeutic substitution in acid-related disorders (ARDs).
We present confirmatory evidence for a role of dystonia genes that had not yet been unequivocally established including PRKRA, TUBB4A, ANO3, and TAF1.
ANO3 encodes anoctamin-3, a Ca+2-dependent phospholipid scramblase expressed in striatal-neurons, that has been implicated in autosomal dominant craniocervical dystonia (Dystonia-24, DYT24, MIM# 615034).
Three genes (GCH1, THAP1, TOR1A) were associated with isolated generalized dystonia, whereas 2 (ANO3, ADCY5) gave rise to combined dystonia-myoclonus phenotypes.
Furthermore, it provides confirmatory evidence for a dystonia-relevant role of ANO3 and ADCY5, both of which likely associate with a broader spectrum of dystonic expressions than previously thought.
In the past 4 years, the definition and classification of dystonia have been revised, and new genes have been identified in patients with isolated hereditary dystonia (DYT23, DYT24, and DYT25).
Compromised anoctamin function is causing a wide range of diseases, such as hearing loss (ANO2), bleeding disorder (ANO6), ataxia and dystonia (ANO3, 10), persistent borrelia and mycobacteria infection (ANO10), skeletal syndromes like gnathodiaphyseal dysplasia and limb girdle muscle dystrophy (ANO5), and cancer (ANO1, 6, 7).
Some genes, such as ANO3, GNAL and CIZ1, have been discovered for isolated dystonia, but they are probably not a common cause of classic cervical dystonia.
Clinical and genetic heterogeneity also characterizes myoclonus-dystonia, which includes not only the classical phenotype associated with epsilon-sarcoglycan mutations but rarely also presentation of ANO3 gene mutations, TITF1 gene mutations typically underlying benign hereditary chorea, and some dopamine synthesis pathway conditions due to GCH1 and TH mutations.
When 10 cases of M5 were subdivided by the differential level into undifferentiated (M5a) and differentiated monocytic leukemia (M5b), expression of CD45RA and CD45RO was strictly restricted to cases with M5a and M5b, respectively.
In this review, we describe the fusion genes recently reported in bone and soft-tissue tumors such as solitary fibrous tumor, aneurysmal bone cyst, nodular fasciitis, CIC-DUX4 fusion gene-positive small round cell tumors, or BCOR-CCNB3-positive sarcoma as well as other genetic aberrations in dedifferentiated liposarcoma, malignant rhabdoid tumor, cartilaginous tumor, Langerhans cell histiocytosis chondroblastoma, or giant cell tumor of the bone.
The individual diagnostic marker positivity was 98% for GATA-binding protein 3, 95% for androgen receptor, 90% for progesterone receptor, 88% for deleted in pancreatic cancer 4, 75% for gross cystic disease fluid protein 15, 72% for cytokeratin 7, 55% for mammaglobin, and 15% for vimentin and Wilms tumor protein 1.
Astrocyte loss may be caused by cytotoxic T cells as seen in Rasmussen encephalitis, auto-antibodies such as in neuromyelitis optica (aquaporin-4 antibodies), or cytokines such as TNF-Alfa in major depressive disorder.
Mutations in KCNJ5, ATP1A1, ATP2B3 and CACNA1D are found in aldosterone producing adenoma (APA) and familial hyperaldosteronism (FH).
Our results suggest that these mutations, in addition to mutations in the KCNJ5 gene and other genes such as ATP1A1, ATP2B3 and CACNA1D, may be responsible for the tumorigenesis of APAs and CPAs with subclinical Cushing's syndrome.
Screening of SOX2 was completed in 89 patients with a variety of ocular anomalies, including 28 with A/M and 61 with normal eye size and anterior segment dysgenesis (28), cataract (14), isolated coloboma (5), or other eye disorders (14).
The overexpression of Kir3.2, a subunit of the G protein-gated inwardly rectifying K(+) channel, is implicated in some of the neurological phenotypes of Down syndrome (DS).
Keppen-Lubinsky syndrome (KPLBS) is a rare disease mainly characterized by severe developmental delay and intellectual disability, microcephaly, large prominent eyes, a narrow nasal bridge, a tented upper lip, a high palate, an open mouth, tightly adherent skin, an aged appearance, and severe generalized lipodystrophy.
We sequenced the exomes of three unrelated individuals affected by KPLBS and found de novo heterozygous mutations in KCNJ6 (GIRK2), which encodes an inwardly rectifying potassium channel and maps to the Down syndrome critical region between DIRK1A and DSCR4.
We evaluated the impact of glucose-lysine Maillard reaction products (Glc-Lys MRPs) on colitis, induced in rats by an administration of 5% dextran sulfate sodium (DSS) in drinking water.
Glc-Lys MRPs ameliorate DSS-induced colitis, as determined by a decrease in disease index activity, colon weight/length ratio, nitric oxide levels in serum, recovery of body weight loss, colon length and serum lysozyme levels.
This study was aimed at determining whether repeated low-level exposure to MRPs, generated via two different heat treatments, can contribute to the modulation of experimental colitis in mice.
Furthermore, we used a sandwich immunoassay to measure serum concentrations of MRPs in 62 patients were simultaneously assessed by the Crohn's disease activity index (CDAI) and the severity activity index of Goebell (SAI).
In the present study monospecific antibodies against MRPs were used to investigate immunohistochemically the distribution of these proteins in routinely processed bowel tissues from 23 patients with ulcerative colitis (UC).
The dimeric hybrid-IgG/IgA inhibited the binding of digoxigenin-conjugated Stx1B to natural ligands (CD77) displayed on Burkitt's lymphoma cell line Ramos.
Furthermore, the purified Stx1 B subunit was able to bind specifically to Gb3Cer expressed on Burkitt's lymphoma cells.
Furthermore, we found that Mcl-1 could be a potential therapeutic target of MECK-induced apoptosis and its stability is regulated by extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1/2 (ERK1/2) signaling MECK can be used as a safe and efficient therapeutic alternative for the treatment of salivary gland cancer.
Although NF-KB RelA (p65) is essential for the expression of many cytokines during pneumonia, its targeted mutation in the lung epithelium was inconsequential for pneumonia-driven LIF induction.
Overall, our data suggest a signaling axis whereby activation of NF-KB RelA in myeloid cells promotes epithelial LIF induction during lung infections, representing a means through which these two cell types collaborate to improve tissue resilience during pneumonia.
Sectm1 was induced during the early stages of pneumococcal pneumonia, and mutation of NF-KB RelA in epithelial cells did not diminish its expression.
To determine the functional significance of the hepatic APR during pneumonia, we challenged APR-null mice lacking hepatocyte signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) and v-rel avian reticuloendotheliosis viral oncogene homolog A (RelA) with Escherichia coli in the airspaces.
Epithelial cells expressed multiple neutrophil-stimulating cytokines during pneumonia, all of which depended on RelA.
Epithelial RelA mutation decreased whole lung levels of CXCL5 and GM-CSF during pneumococcal pneumonia, whereas lung levels of other neutrophil-recruiting factors were unaffected.
We demonstrate that RelA-P-Ser536 is a feature of human lung and skin fibroblasts, but not lung epithelial cells, in vitro and is present in sclerotic skin and diseased lungs of patients suffering from idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis.
Because innate immunity gene induction depends on NF-KB RelA (also known as p65) during pneumonia, we generated a murine model of RelA mutated throughout the alveolar epithelium.
Sorted cell populations from mouse lungs revealed that CXCL5 was induced during pneumonia in type I cells, which did not require RelA.
These are also, to our knowledge, the first evidence for entirely RelA-independent pathways of innate immunity gene induction in any cell during pneumonia.
We review the literature of genetic PD autopsies from cases with molecularly confirmed PD or parkinsonism and summarize main findings on SNCA (n = 25), Parkin (n = 20, 17 bi-allelic and 3 heterozygotes), PINK1 (n = 5, 1 bi-allelic and 4 heterozygotes), DJ-1 (n = 1), LRRK2 (n = 55), GBA (n = 10 Gaucher disease patients with parkinsonism), DNAJC13, GCH1, ATP13A2, PLA2G6 (n = 8 patients, 2 with PD), MPAN (n = 2), FBXO7, RAB39B, and ATXN2 (SCA2), as well as on 22q deletion syndrome (n = 3).
We performed genetic testing consisting of C9orf72 hexanucleotide expansion, ATXN2 polyglutamine (polyQ) expansion, and targeted next generation sequencing using the ONDRISeq, a gene panel consisting of 80 genes known to be associated with neurodegenerative diseases such as ALS, FTD, Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, and vascular cognitive impairment.
Pathological developments leading to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) are associated with misbehavior of several key proteins, such as SOD1 (superoxide dismutase 1), TARDBP/TDP-43, FUS, C9orf72, and dipeptide repeat proteins generated as a result of the translation of the intronic hexanucleotide expansions in the C9orf72 gene, PFN1 (profilin 1), GLE1 (GLE1, RNA export mediator), PURA (purine rich element binding protein A), FLCN (folliculin), RBM45 (RNA binding motif protein 45), SS18L1/CREST, HNRNPA1 (heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein A1), HNRNPA2B1 (heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein A2/B1), ATXN2 (ataxin 2), MAPT (microtubule associated protein tau), and TIA1 (TIA1 cytotoxic granule associated RNA binding protein).
Spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 (SCA2) is an autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxia that occurs as a consequence of abnormal CAG expansions in the ATXN2 gene.
Recent findings linking ataxin-2 intermediate expansions to other neurodegenerative diseases such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis have provided insights into the ataxin-2-related toxicity mechanism in neurodegenerative diseases and have raised new ethical challenges to molecular predictive diagnosis of SCA2.
Spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 (SCA2) is among the most common forms of autosomal dominant ataxias, accounting for 15% of the total families.
Spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 (SCA2) is due to a CAG expansion (CAGexp) at ATXN2.
Expansion of polyglutamine trinucleotide (CAG) within ATXN2 gene with 35 or more repeats, results in spinocerebellar ataxia type-2.
Recent studies have identified the RNA-binding protein Ataxin-2 as a genetic determinant or risk factor for various diseases including spinocerebellar ataxia type II (SCA2) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), amongst others.
Here we show that synaptobrevin 2 sorting involves determinants within its SNARE motif that are recognized by the ANTH domains of the endocytic adaptors AP180 and clathrin assembly lymphoid myeloid leukemia (CALM).
Specifically, fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3), desmoglein 2 (DSG2), E3 ubiquitin ligase c-CBL (casitas B-cell lymphoma), cancer/testis antigen NY-ESO-1 (CTAG1A/B), undifferentiated embryonic cell transcription factor 1 (UTF1) and synaptosomal-associated protein, 91 kDa homolog (SNAP91) were shown to represent specific biomarkers of human spermatogonia.
Recently, the gene encoding clathrin assembly protein of lymphoid myeloid leukemia (CALM), which is homologous to the AP180, was cloned from rat brain, and its expression differential to AP180 was reported (Kim and Lee, 1999).
The clathrin assembly protein lymphoid myeloid leukemia (CALM) gene, encodes a homologoue of the neuronal clathrin assembly protein AP180.
The clathrin assembly lymphoid myeloid leukemia (CALM) gene encodes a putative homologue of the clathrin assembly synaptic protein AP180.
The expression level of ERp57 was also elevated in rat insulinoma INS-1 cells by inducible knock-down of the atg7-gene.
Tissue specimens of nine dental follicles and 69 ameloblastomas were immunohistochemically examined with antibodies against ATG7, LC3, and p62.
Immunohistochemical reactivity for ATG7, LC3, and p62 was detected in many odontogenic epithelial cells and several endothelial cells and fibroblasts in dental follicles and ameloblastomas.
Expression of ATG7, LC3, and p62 was found markedly in neoplastic cells near the basement membrane rather than central polyhedral cells in ameloblastomas.
Expression of ATG7, LC3, and p62 in dental follicles and ameloblastomas suggests that autophagy regulation might be affected by microenvironment alterations during tumorigenesis.
Atg7 deficiency alters progression of Braf(V600E)-driven tumors from adenomas (Braf(V600E); atg7(-/-)) and adenocarcinomas (trp53(-/-); Braf(V600E); atg7(-/-)) to benign oncocytomas that accumulated morphologically and functionally defective mitochondria, suggesting that defects in mitochondrial metabolism may compromise continued tumor growth.
At later stages of tumorigenesis, Atg7 deficiency resulted in an accumulation of defective mitochondria, proliferative defects, reduced tumor burden, conversion of adenomas and adenocarcinomas to oncocytomas, and increased mouse life span.
Using genetically engineered mouse models (GEMMs) for human non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC), we found that deletion of the essential autophagy gene, Atg7, in KRAS(G12D)-driven NSCLC inhibits tumor growth and converts adenomas and adenocarcinomas to benign oncocytomas characterized by the accumulation of respiration-defective mitochondria.
atg7 loss altered tumor fate from adenomas and carcinomas to oncocytomas-rare, predominantly benign tumors characterized by the accumulation of defective mitochondria.
Subsequent studies demonstrated that Atg5(-/-) and Atg7(-/-) livers give rise to adenomas, Atg4C(-/-) mice are susceptible to chemical carcinogenesis, and Bif1(-/-) mice are prone to spontaneous tumors, indicating that autophagy defects promote tumorigenesis.
Scavenger receptor class A, member 3 (SCARA3) was previously found to be overexpressed in ovarian/primary peritoneal carcinoma (OC/PPC) compared with breast carcinoma effusions by global gene expression analysis.
p15RS is a ubiquitously expressed nuclear protein that is positively regulated by p15 and, in turn, inhibits the expression of cyclin D and cyclin E. To determine whether p15RS has malignancy inhibitory functions in addition to its inhibitory effects on cell cycle entry, we ectopically expressed p15RS in metastatic melanoma A375 cells, in which p15 gene is deleted and p15RS expression is dramatically downregulated, and examined the effect on various malignant phenotypes.
Wilms' tumor 1-associating protein (WTAP) has been reported to be a ubiquitously expressed nuclear protein.
The results showed that TCF7L2 polymorphism was associated with breast cancer (Homogeneous model: OR=1.17, 95%CI=1.02-1.35, I (2) =21.8%, p for heterogeneity=0.276; Heterogeneous model: OR=1.11, 95%CI=1.03-1.20, I (2) =0.0%, p for heterogeneity=0.543), prostate cancer (Homogeneous model: OR=0.89, 95%CI=0.84-0.96, I (2) =0.0%, p for heterogeneity=0.640; Heterogeneous model: OR=0.89, 95%CI=0.84-0.95, I (2) =0.0%, p for heterogeneity=0.871), and colon cancer (Heterogeneous model: OR=1.15, 95%CI=1.01-1.31, I (2) =0.0%, p for heterogeneity=0.658), but not with colorectal cancer, lung cancer, and ovarian cancer.
The present meta-analysis indicated that there were significantly associations between the TCF7L2 rs7903146 polymorphism and risk of breast, prostate and colon cancers, rather than colorectal cancer, lung cancer, and ovarian cancer.
Mutations in the gene encoding comparative gene identification 58 (CGI-58), also known as Alfa Beta hydrolase domain-containing 5 (ABHD5), cause neutral lipid storage disorder with ichthyosis (NLSDI).
It has been elucidated that, of the ichthyosis-causative genes, ABCA12, ALOXE3, ALOX12B, CYP4F22, CERS3, ABHD5, PNPLA1 and ELOVL4 work in the formation of the corneocyte lipid envelope (CLE), a structure that is essential to sound skin barrier function.
We discuss known inborn errors of CTGM, including deficiencies of: AGPAT2 (a form of generalized lipodystrophy), LPIN1 (childhood rhabdomyolysis), LPIN2 (an inflammatory condition, Majeed syndrome, described elsewhere in this issue), DGAT1 (protein loosing enteropathy), perilipin 1 (partial lipodystrophy), CGI-58 (gene ABHD5, neutral lipid storage disease (NLSD) with ichthyosis and "Jordan's anomaly" of vacuolated polymorphonuclear leukocytes), adipose triglyceride lipase (ATGL, gene PNPLA2, NLSD with myopathy, cardiomyopathy and Jordan's anomaly), hormone-sensitive lipase (HSL, gene LIPE, hypertriglyceridemia, and insulin resistance).
In current study, we have discovered, using a comprehensive investigative regimen, a novel and tissue-specific role of claudin-3, a tight junction integral protein, in inhibiting colon cancer progression by serving as the common rheostat of Stat-3 and Wnt-signaling activation.
Claudin-3-/- mice revealed dedifferentiated and leaky colonic epithelium, and developed invasive adenocarcinoma when subjected to colon cancer.
Wnt-signaling hyperactivation, albeit in GSK-3Beta independent manner, differentiated colon cancer in claudin-3-/- mice versus WT-mice.
Genetic and pharmacological studies confirmed that claudin-3 loss induces Wnt/Beta-catenin activation, which is further exacerbated by Stat-3-activation and help promote colon cancer.
Among the paradoxical claudin reaction nuclear localization of marker was observed relatively rarely: claudin-3 in 2.5% cases of colon cancer; claudin-4 in 8.5% of colon polyps.
Mislocalization claudin-3 to nucleus in colon cancer and mislocalization claudin-4 to nucleus in adenomas of the colon were detected for the first time.
Our approach aimed at evaluation of a selective and targeted cancer gene therapy of claudin-3- and/or claudin-4- expressing colon carcinoma in vitro and in vivo by using translation optimized CPE expressing vector.
In this study the recombinant CPE and a translation optimized CPE expressing vector (optCPE) was used for targeted gene therapy of claudin-3 and/or -4 overexpressing colon cancer cell lines.
All experiments were performed in the human SW480, SW620, HCT116, CaCo-2 and HT-29 colon cancer and the isogenic Sk-Mel5 and Sk-Mel5 Cldn-3-YFP melanoma cell lines.
Claudin-3 and -4 overexpressing colon carcinoma lines showed high sensitivity towards both recCPE application and optCPE gene transfer.
This novel approach demonstrates that optCPE gene transfer represents a promising and efficient therapeutic option for a targeted suicide gene therapy of claudin-3 and/or claudin-4 overexpressing colon carcinomas, leading to rapid and effective tumor cell killing in vitro and in vivo.
To investigate the expression of claudin-3 in colorectal carcinoma and its association with the occurrence, progression and prognosis of colorectal cancer.
Claudin-3 is over-expressed in colorectal cancer tissues, and its high expression may promote the occurrence and progression of colorectal cancer.
Here, we report that epidermal growth factor (EGF) increases the expression of claudin-3 in human colorectal adenocarcinoma HT-29 cells.
In conclusion, our results show a novel role for claudin-3 overexpression in promoting the malignant potential of colorectal cancer cells, which is potentially regulated by the EGF-activated ERK1/2 and PI3K-Akt pathways.
Patients with essential thrombocythemia (ET) and polycythemia vera (PV), complicated by microvascular ischemic or thrombotic events, have shortened platelet survival, increased beta-thromboglobulin, platelet factor 4, and thrombomodulin levels, and increased urinary thromboxane B2 excretion.
Our results suggest that CEP68 gene variants may play an important role in MNSAID-UA susceptibility and, despite the different regulatory mechanisms involved depending on the specific affected organ, in the development of hypersensitivity reactions to NSAIDs.
Baboon anti-pig antibody (Ab) was measured before CPB, before circulatory arrest, during AbA, at the end of CPB, and daily after HTx.
At 4 dpi a severe fibrinosuppurative bronchopneumonia had developed.
However, the SrGAP3-deficient mice showed little to no interest in burying marbles; a behavior that is seen in some animal models related to autism, supporting the view that SrGAP3 plays a role in neurodevelopmental disorders.
BA synthesis was directly quantified by measuring serum concentrations of 7alpha-hydroxycholest-4-en-3-one (C4), along with serum FGF19 and other parameters, in 44 patients with primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) and 10 healthy subjects.
Whether fibroblast growth factor 19 (FGF19) or farnesoid X receptor (FXR) dependent signaling are involved in the regulation of BA homeostasis in primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) remains unknown.
Our results provide further insight into the specific relationship between histone H4 modification and gene expression during spermatogenesis, which could help to elucidate the epigenetic disorders underlying male infertility.
Previous studies have resulted in the isolation of the human HSST gene from within the Treacher Collins syndrome locus (TCOF1) critical region on 5q.
As a result of these studies, mutations within the coding sequence and adjacent splice junctions of HSST can be excluded from a causative role in the pathogenesis of Treacher Collins syndrome.
In univariate analyses, diabetes mellitus, chronic kidney disease, ischemic etiology of LBBB, dilated left atrium, reduced LVEF, dilated left ventricle, and impaired LV global strain (GLS &gt; -12.2%, global circumferential strain &gt; -11.8%, and twist &lt; 6.5) showed associations with the composite end point.
Individuals with T1D had increased systolic torsion (P = 0.035), systolic torsion rate (P = 0.032), peak Ecl (P = 0.001), and rates of change of systolic (P = 0.007) and diastolic (P = 0.007) Ecl Individuals with T1D, with normal structure, LVEF, and strain, have increased extracellular volume and increased native T1 values with associated augmented torsion and Ecl These measures may be useful in detecting the early stages of diabetic cardiomyopathy and warrant larger prospective studies.NEW &amp; NOTEWORTHY Individuals with type 1 diabetes, with normal left ventricular structure and function (ejection fraction and strain), have signs of interstitial fibrosis, measured with MRI as increased extracellular volume fraction and increased native myocardial T1, which significantly correlated with a number of measures of augmented left ventricular twist function.
In this study, we show that hyperinsulinemia in the Rag/MKR mice increases the expression of mesenchymal transcription factors, TWIST1 and ZEB1, and increases the expression of the angiogenesis marker, vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGFA).
Aortic PWV correlated crudely with age (p &lt; 0.001), the presence of diabetes (p &lt; 0.001), hypertension (p &lt; 0.001), eGFR (p &lt; 0.001), LVMI (p = 0.01), e/e' (p &lt; 0.001) and LV twist (p = 0.003).
There is limited information regarding the role of left ventricular (LV) twist and the effect of exercise in type 2 diabetes (T2D).
These results demonstrated that quercetin ameliorates the EMT of HK-2 and NRK-52E cells induced by high glucose and renal fibrosis induced by diabetes, and these effects have been associated with the inhibition of the two transcriptional factors (snail and twist) and the activation of mTORC1/p70S6K.
Activin Receptor-Like Kinase 5 (ALK-5) is related to some types of cancer, such as breast, lung and pancreas.
Overall, we discussed about the main interactions between ALK-5 and six inhibitors that may be used as starting point for designing of new molecules to the cancer treatment.
In summary, the results suggest that eupatolide suppresses the migration and invasion of breast cancer cells by blocking the canonical ALK5-SMAD3 signaling pathway and the non-canonical ERK and AKT signaling pathways.
Expression of a mutant TBetaRI that signals but does not interact with Smad7 prevented the CerS4-mediated inhibition of migration in various cancer cells.
TBetaRI-Smo cross-talk at the cilia in CerS4-deficient 4T1 mammary cancer cells induced liver metastasis from orthotopic allografts in both wild-type and CerS4-deficient mice, which was prevented by overexpression of Smad7 or knockdown of intraflagellar transport protein 88 (IFT88).
Transforming growth factor type 1 receptor (ALK5) is kinase associated with a wide variety of pathological processes, and inhibition of ALK5 is a good strategy to treat many kinds of cancer and fibrotic diseases.
The high mortality rates observed in patients with invasive aspergillosis caused by azole-resistant A. fumigatus (ARAF) isolates pose serious challenges to the clinical microbiologist for timely identification of resistance and appropriate therapeutic interventions.
MKL/myocardin-like 2 (MKL2) encodes myocardin-related transcription factor B in a megakaryoblastic leukemia gene family, and C11orf95 (chromosome 11 open reading frame 95) is a hypothetical protein.
Serum levels of IL-16, IL-33 and the decoy receptor of IL-33, soluble ST2, are elevated in allergic rhinitis.
Recent studies show that IL-16, soluble ST2 or anti-IL-33 reduce type 2 cytokines (such as IL-5) and eosinophilia in murine models of allergic asthma or allergic rhinitis respectively.
In this study, we studied the release of IL-5, IL-16, IL-33 and soluble ST2 in allergic rhinitis patients after nasal allergen challenge and natural pollen exposure.
The observed upregulation of soluble ST2 and IL-16 after nasal allergen challenge and during peak pollination season suggests potential regulatory roles of these cytokines in the inflammatory reaction in allergic rhinitis.
To detect the expression and distribution of the lung surfactant protein D (surfactant protein D,SP-D ) and IL-16 in nasal mucosa of allergic rhinitis and nasal polyps, and then probe into their significance in the pathology of allergic rhinitis and nasal polyps.
Fifteen cases of allergic rhinitis, fifteen cases of nasal polyps and fifteen cases of inferior turbinate mucosa were studied to detect the expression of SP-D and IL-16 by immunohistochemistry method.
The expression of SP-D and IL-16 in allergic rhinitis and nasal polyps were dramatically higher in controls (P &lt; 0.01).
There was no remarkable difference in the expression of SP-D and IL-16 between allergic rhinitis and nasal polyps (P &gt; 0.05).
IL-16 is an important eosinophil chemokine in the process of allergic rhinitis and nasal polyps,and it can also enhance the local role of eosinophils,thus it can involve in the process of allergic rhinitis and nasal polyps disease.
Though a chemotactin for CD4(+) cells and eosinophils, IL-16 also modulates their production of factors that influence inflammatory lung diseases, e.g., asthma and allergic rhinitis.
Interleukin-16 (IL-16) is a cytokine that induces selective migration of CD4+ cells and participates in inflammatory diseases including allergic rhinitis.
We evaluated the variability of IL-16 and the effects of the antiallergic drugs fexofenadine (40 mg/kg/day) and ramatroban (30 mg/kg/day) on IL-16 in an OVA-sensitized BALB/c murine experimental allergic rhinitis model.
These results suggest that IL-16 was both systemically and locally upregulated in the murine allergic rhinitis model and that IL-16 changed in parallel to allergic state by treatment with the drugs.
The results showed abnormally increased levels of IL-16 (294.4 +/- 15.24 pg/ml), serum eosinophils with absolute count (510.0 +/- 93.57, P&gt;0.05), and total serum IgE (287.9 +/- 61.22 IU/ml) using ELFA in patients of combined asthma and rhinitis, than in each of them alone.
We first examined the IL-16 expression of serum and mucosal tissue in patients with allergic rhinitis.
IL-16 levels were elevated in the serum of patients with allergic rhinitis compared with normal controls.
IL-16 was significantly correlated with eosinophils in the peripheral blood of allergic rhinitis patients.
This IL-16 cytokine may be strongly associated with the developmental mechanism of allergic rhinitis.
Speech fluency was assessed in 35 patients with frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) who presented with progressive non-fluent aphasia (PNFA, n=11), semantic dementia (SemD, n=12), or a social and executive disorder without aphasia (SOC/EXEC, n=12).
Two subtypes commonly present with a language disorder: semantic dementia (SemD) and progressive nonfluent aphasia (PNFA).
Expression of several genes associated with schizophrenia or autism including Sema3a, Trfr2 and Vldlr were found to be altered as were protein levels of Foxp2.
We classified 67 patients with PPA into three clinical variants: semantic dementia (SEMD), progressive nonfluent aphasia (PNFA), and logopenic progressive aphasia (LPA), and we compared the severity of behavioral dysfunction, as measured by the Neuropsychiatric Inventory, in these groups and patients with frontotemporal dementia (FTD) and Alzheimer disease (AD).
The authors asked patients with progressive nonfluent aphasia (PNFA), patients with semantic dementia (SemD), and nonaphasic patients with a disorder of social comportment and executive functioning (SOC/EXEC) to narrate the story of a wordless children's picture book.
Each sequence is manually annotated with primary function, subfunction and subcellular location, and extensively annotated in an automated process with data extracted from external databases, including gene information from LocusLink and Ensembl; disease information from OMIM; protein-protein interaction data from MINT and DIP; functional domain information from Pfam; protein fingerprints from PRINTS; protein family and family-specific signatures from InterPro; structure data from PDB; mutation data from PMD; BLAST homology data from NCBI NR; and proteins found to be related based on LocusLink and SWISS-PROT references and sequence and taxonomy data.
An increase in the ratio of Abeta(WT)/Abeta(MUT(Arctic)), therefore, may result in the accumulation of potential neurotoxic protofibrils and acceleration of disease progression in familial Alzheimer's disease mutation carriers.
To gain insight into the pathogenesis of these tumors we have analyzed the immunophenotype (ARID1A, MLH1, PMS2, MSH2, MSH6, p53, b-catenin, SMARCB1, synaptophysin, chromogranin A, and CD56) and mutational status (PTEN, KRAS, PIK3CA, TP53 and POLE) of 4 dedifferentiated endometrial carcinomas with strong and diffuse neuroendocrine expression.
In gynecological cancer, ARID1A mutations have been identified in 46-57% of clear cell carcinoma and 30% of endometrioid carcinoma.
We recently identified 3 mutually exclusive mechanisms of switch/sucrose nonfermentable (SWI/SNF) complex inactivation (BRG1 inactivation, INI1 inactivation or ARID1A/ARID1B co-inactivation) that are associated with histologic dedifferentiation in the majority of dedifferentiated endometrial carcinoma.
The tumor suppressor gene, AT Rich Interactive Domain 1A (ARID1A) mutation has been reported in a variety of cancers, especially the endometrium-related gynecological cancers, including the ovarian clear cell carcinoma, ovarian endometrioid carcinoma, and uterine endometrioid carcinoma.
The current study aimed to evaluate serum levels of MFAP4 in patients with pulmonary fibrosis in order to test its potential as biomarker in clinical practice.
A further aim was to determine whether MFAP4 deficiency in mice affects the formation of pulmonary fibrosis in the bleomycin model of lung fibrosis.
MFAP4 levels were increased in BAL of bleomycin treated mice with pulmonary fibrosis.
MFAP4 is not elevated in sera of patients with pulmonary fibrosis or bleomycin treated mice with pulmonary fibrosis.
The aim of this study was to test the hypothesis that plasma MFAP4 (pMFAP4) reflects clinical outcomes in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
Multiple linear regressions showed positive associations between pMFAP4 and the Global initiative for Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) grade (p = 0.01), modified Medical Research Council score (p &lt; 0.0001) and BODE index (p = 0.04).
For essential thrombocythemia, reported risk factors for leukemic transformation include advanced age, extreme thrombocytosis, anemia, leukocytosis, and sequence variants/mutations involving TP53 and EZH2 (for expansion of gene symbols, see www.genenames.org); for polycythemia vera, advanced age, leukocytosis, abnormal karyotype, mutations involving SRSF2 and IDH2, and treatment with pipobroman, chlorambucil, or P32; and for PMF, increased blast percentage, thrombocytopenia, abnormal karyotype, triple-negative driver mutational status, and sequence variants/mutations involving SRSF2, RUNX1, CEBPA, and SH2B3.
In the present case, i(17q)/-17, der(12p), del(5q26), del(7q36), and del(20q11) indicate possible alterations in TP53, ETV6, IDH2, EZH2, and SRSF2 genes, which are responsible for pathomechanism, genetic instability, clonal evolution, and advancement of disease condition.
Accumulating evidence indicates that enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) promotes the metastatic ability of solid tumors, but the role of EZH2 in extramedullary infiltration (EMI) in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) has not been thoroughly explored.
We found that the messenger RNA (mRNA) and protein expression levels of EZH2 in AML patients were both significantly higher than in idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) patients.
Histopathological examination (HPE) of excised gland showed multiple Hurthle cell adenomas in both lobes of thyroid along with foci of papillary thyroid carcinoma which on immunohistochemistry were thyroglobulin positive and PSA negative.
Univariate analysis showed that male gender, thyroglobulin concentrations &gt;=300 ng/ml and tumor diameter &gt;30 mm were significantly more frequent in patients with oxyphile carcinoma compared to patients with oxyphile adenoma, while coexisting Hashimoto thyreoiditis and positive AntiTPO antibodies appeared significantly less frequent in the carcinoma group.
The histologic appearance together with the immune profile was diagnostic of WCCA, with diffuse positivity for GATA3, focal weak positivity for parathyroid hormone, and negativity for PAX8, thyroglobulin, TTF1, synaptophysin, chromogranin, and S100p.
After immunohistochemical characterization using a panel of chromogranin A, thyroglobulin, and calcitonin, 7 of the former thyroid neoplasms were diagnosed as thyroid adenomas, 1 was diagnosed as a thyroid carcinoma, and 4 were diagnosed as parathyroid adenomas.
The findings obtained using these cell lines derived from ovarian clear cell adenocarcinoma indicate that integrin alpha3 may associated with the acquisition of malignant potential by clear cell adenocarcinoma.
No entanto, a existencia de uma patologia cronica pode determinar um elevado nivel de cuidados preventivos gerais, inclusivamente resultando numa melhoria global do seu nivel de saude oral, o que podera justificar os resultados obtidos.Conclusao: A presenca de diabetes mellitus tipo 1 em doentes tratados com bomba de insulina nao esta associada a um aumento da prevalencia de lesoes de carie dentaria.
Few of the substrates of Tankyrases are Telomeric Repeat binding Factor protein (TRF1), Axis Inhibitory protein (AXIN 1&amp;amp;2), Insulin Responsive Amino Peptidase (IRAP), Nuclear Mitotic Apparatus protein (NuMa), that become aberrantly active due to the apparent overexpression of the enzyme during hyper proliferative disease conditions like cancer, fibrosis and metabolic disorders like diabetes.
O objetivo deste estudo foi avaliar a utilidade deste exame numa populacao de criancas e adolescentes obesos, maioritariamente de etnia caucasiana.Material e Metodos: Foram recrutados 226 doentes [indice de massa corporal z-score 3,35 A+/- 0,59, 90% caucasianos, 55% do sexo feminino, idade mediana de 12,3 (ambito: 8,9 a 17,6) anos] referenciados a consulta de obesidade pediatrica de um hospital terciario, com criterios para rastreio de diabetes mellitus tipo 2.
Finally, we speculate on the potential benefits of the inhibition of Sin3B-containing complexes for the treatment of cancer.
Expert opinion: Further identification and characterization of specific Sin3B-containing complexes provide a unique opportunity to prevent the pro-tumorigenic effects of the senescence-associated secretory phenotype, and to abrogate cancer stem cell quiescence and the associated resistance to therapy.
SIN3B has been implicated in the initiation of senescence in vitro Here we show that in a mouse model of prostate cancer, SIN3B provides a barrier to malignant progression.
SIN3B was required for PTEN-induced cellular senescence and prevented progression to invasive prostate adenocarcinoma.
Furthermore, SIN3B was downregulated in human prostate adenocarcinoma correlating with upregulation of its target genes.
Our results suggest a tumor suppressor function for SIN3B that limits prostate adenocarcinoma progression, with potential implications for the use of SIN3B and its target genes as candidate diagnostic markers to distinguish indolent from aggressive disease.
However, specific roles for SIN3A and SIN3B in breast cancer progression have not been characterized.
Additionally, we analyzed microarray data sets to identify correlations of SIN3A and SIN3B expression with survival in patients with breast cancer.
These data sets indicated that high mRNA expression of SIN3A as well as low mRNA expression of SIN3B correlates with longer relapse free survival specifically in patients with triple negative breast cancer which corresponds with our in vitro and in vivo data.
These results demonstrate key functional differences between SIN3 paralogs in regulating the process of breast cancer metastasis and suggest metastasis suppressive roles of SIN3A and metastasis promoting roles of SIN3B.
Finally, by immunohistochemical staining of primary breast tissue microarrays we find that EMSY/KDM5A/SIN3B complex subunits are frequently overexpressed in primary breast cancer cases in a correlative manner.
Here, using a mouse model of pancreatic cancer, we have demonstrated that SIN3B is required for activated KRAS-induced senescence in vivo.
Furthermore, evaluation of human pancreatic tissue and cancer cells revealed that Sin3B was decreased in control and PDAC samples, compared with samples from patients with pancreatic inflammation.
Among proteins in the c-Myc/Max/Mad/Sin3 regulatory complex, Mad4 and Sin3B are routinely detected in human glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) cell lines.
In response to gamma radiation, the expression of Sin3B and Mad4 in GBM cells was upregulated in parallel over time, suggesting that Sin3B may play a role in the regulation of Mad4 stability.
Using the Drosophila heart as a platform for identifying novel gene interactions leading to heart disease, we found that the Rho-GTPase Cdc42 cooperates with the cardiac transcription factor Tinman/Nkx2-5.
What is more important is that the depressed-expression of Cav1.3 paralleled with enhanced-expression of Snapin was documented in atrial samples from atrial fibrillation (AF) patients.
Furthermore, inactivation of Cav1.3 channels promotes also atrial fibrillation and flutter in knockout mice suggesting that these channels can play a role in stabilizing atrial rhythm.
The significance of the tissue-specific expression of the channel is underpinned by our previous demonstration of atrial fibrillation in a Cav1.3 null mutant mouse model.
The novel Cav1.3 (Alfa1D) L-type Ca^2+ channel plays a significant role in sinoatrial (SA) and atrioventricular (AV) nodes function and in atrial fibrillation.
Interestingly, oncogenic CARD11 variants associated with diffuse large B cell lymphoma spontaneously induce Lin(Ub)n-Bcl10 production to extents that correlate with their abilities to activate NF-KB and with their enhanced abilities to bind HOIP and Bcl10.
Our previous studies showed important regulatory functions of RNF31 in controlling important oncogenic pathways in breast cancer, such as ERAlfa and p53.
This review highlights recent discoveries on RNF31 functions in nuclear factor modifications, breast cancer progression and possible therapeutic inhibitors targeting RNF31.
The atypical E3 ubiquitin ligase RNF31 is highly expressed in human breast cancer, the most frequent neoplastic lethality among women.
Here, RNF31 depletion in breast cancer cells in combination with global gene expression profiling revealed p53 (TP53) signaling as a potential RNF31 target.
Interestingly, RNF31 decreased p53 stability, whereas depletion of RNF31 in breast cancer cells caused cell cycle arrest and cisplatin-induced apoptosis in a p53-dependent manner.
Together, our findings suggest RNF31 as a potential therapeutic target to restore p53 function in breast cancer.
By examining the kinetics of pathway activation in TRAIL-sensitive lymphoma cells wild-type or deficient for RIP1, TRAF2, cIAP1/2 or HOIP, we report here that TRAIL induces two phases of JNK and NF-KB activation.
Literature search included the terms adrenergic, noradrenergic, reuptake, inhibitors, analgesia, NET, norepinephrine transporter, and pain using Medline, Google scholar, Web of Knowledge, www.clinicaltrials.gov, and Pharmaprojects (Informa UK Ltd. 2012).
Norepinephrine transporter blockade seems to be essential for analgesia, but optimal concentrations are unknown.
The third type is the secondary PHA1, which is strongly associated with urinary tract infections and/or urinary tract malformations.
To identify mutation in SCNN1B and SCNN1G genes in an adolescent with suspicious Liddle syndrome and his family members and to explore the screening target subjects of Liddle syndrome.
Genetic analysis of the C-terminus of SCNN1B and SCNN1G genes was conducted in an adolescent, with treatment-resistant hypertension and hypokalemia, who was suspected of having Liddle syndrome, and his family members.
In adulthood, an induced nephron-specific deficiency of AlfaENaC (Scnn1a) resulted in pseudohypoaldosteronism type 1 (PHA-1) with sodium loss, hyperkalemia, and metabolic acidosis that is rescued through high-sodium/low-potassium (HNa+/LK+) diet.
Liddle syndrome is an autosomal dominant genetic condition that causes hypertension and hypokalemia due to a gain-of-function mutation in the SCNN1B or SCNN1G genes which code for the epithelial sodium channel in the kidney.
Loss-of-function mutations of the MR are responsible for renal pseudohypoaldosteronism type 1 (PHA1), a rare disease of mineralocorticoid resistance presenting in the newborn with weight loss, failure to thrive, vomiting and dehydration, associated with hyperkalemia and metabolic acidosis, despite extremely elevated levels of plasma renin and aldosterone.
In the presence of pyelonephritis, the same biochemical picture can occur with transient type 1 pseudohypoaldosteronism (PHA-1) also termed type 4 renal tubular acidosis.
Pseudohypoaldosteronism type 1 (PHA1) is a rare genetic disease characterized by resistance to aldosterone, and the renal form of PHA1 is associated with heterozygous inactivating mutations in NR3C2, which encodes mineralocorticoid receptor (MR).
Recent work has identified cancer-associated U2AF35 missense mutations in two zinc-finger (ZnF) domains, but little is known about Q157R/P substitutions within the second ZnF.
Zinc finger (ZNF) proteins, a diverse family of proteins, have multiple biological functions in cancer.
However, the function and underlying mechanisms of ZNF185 in the tumorigenesis of lung adenocarcinoma (LAC) remain unclear.
We found that the protein expression of ZNF185 was significantly downregulated in LAC tissues compared with the adjacent non-cancerous tissues (ANCT) (37.10% vs 58.06%, P=0.015), and was negatively correlated with the lymph node metastasis of the LAC patients (P=0.005).
In view of the exploitation of tetraspanins by organisms for survival, these proteins could be targeted using specific antibodies, recombinant large extracellular loop (LEL) domains, small-molecule mimetics and siRNAs as potential novel and efficacious putative targets to combat African trypanosomiasis by killing the tsetse fly vector.
Infection of hepatocytic cells by two major pathogens, the hepatitis C virus and the malaria parasite, also requires the tetraspanin CD81.
Our results unravel a functional link between CD81 and cholesterol during infection by malaria parasites, and illustrate that tetraspanin microdomains constitute a novel type of membrane microdomains that could be used by pathogens for infection.
The CXCL11 gene may also play a role in BK polyomavirus-associated nephropathy.
Our aim was to compare expression levels of CXCL11 in BK polyomavirus-infected versus noninfected kidney transplant patients with nephropathy and healthy controls.
Taken together, the results indicated that sorafenib had protective effects against renal fibrosis; its mechanism of action was associated with inhibition of macrophage infiltration via the CXCR3/CXCL11 pathway.
Urinary mRNA levels of CXCL10 and CXCL11 are decreased, and those of collagen I A1 chain and fibronectin are increased in diabetic nephropathy.
For this purpose, serum concentration of interleukin 2 (IL2), interleukin 10 (IL10), interferon-gamma (IFNG), Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) and Toll-like receptor 9 (TLR9) were measured in blood samples obtained from F(2) piglets (n = 334) of a Duroc x Pietrain resource population (DUPI) after Mycoplasma hypopneumoniae (Mh), tetanus toxoid (TT) and Porcine Reproductive and Respiratory Syndrome Virus (PRRSV) vaccination at 6, 9 and 15 weeks of age.
Not only TLR-2 gene polymorphisms but also immunoglobulins (IgG, IgM, IgA), IgG subsets (G1, G2, G3), and specific antibody levels (anti-tetanus and anti-hemophilus influenza) were determined to exclude humoral immunodeficiencies.
While glutamate is not a known OAT4 or OATP2B1 substrate, we propose that its high intracellular concentration has the potential to drive accumulation of substrates from the fetal circulation.
Cycling of glutamate across the placenta involving efflux via OAT4 and OATP2B1 and subsequent reuptake will drive placental uptake of organic anions from the fetal circulation.
Efflux transport of olmesartan via OAT4 from syncytiotrophoblasts to the fetal circulation might be facilitated in the presence of an inwardly directed physiological chloride gradient and extracellular DHEAS.
This is probably the first case report of cobalamin intracellular metabolism defect (CblC/CblD/CblF/CblJ or ABCD4) presenting as diabetic ketoacidosis.
Moderate to severe sensorineural hearing loss and progressive RP characterizes Usher syndrome type IIa (USH2A), which maps to the long arm of chromosome 1q41.
Usher syndrome type IIa (OMIM 276901), an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by moderate to severe sensorineural hearing loss and progressive retinitis pigmentosa, maps to the long arm of human chromosome 1q41 between markers AFM268ZD1 and AFM144XF2.
Moderate to severe non-progressive high frequency hearing loss with RP and normal vestibular function describes Usher syndrome type IIa, which has been localized to 1q41.
As one subtype of the class IIa HDACs, HDAC9 is capable to repress/de-repress their target genes in tumor, inflammation, atherosclerosis and metabolic diseases.
Taken together, our data suggest that SNP rs2107595 may contribute to coronary atherosclerosis and CAD risk through a possible mechanism of regulating HDAC9 expression and gene-environment interactions.
These results suggest that HDAC9 may participate in ox-LDL-induced endothelial damage and inflammation during atherosclerosis development.
Our results also supported robust associations with ischaemic stroke for four other loci that have been reported in previous studies, including PITX2 (first stage OR 1*39, 1*29-1*49, p=3*26 x 10-19; joint OR 1*37, 1*30-1*45, p=2*79 x 10-32) and ZFHX3 (first stage OR 1*19, 1*11-1*27, p=2*93 x 10-7; joint OR 1*17, 1*11-1*23, p=2*29 x 10-10) for cardioembolic stroke, and HDAC9 (first stage OR 1*29, 1*18-1*42, p=3*50 x 10-8; joint OR 1*24, 1*15-1*33, p=4*52 x 10-9) for large artery atherosclerosis stroke.
In this study, we investigated the candidacy and directionality of HDAC9 in atherosclerosis and analyzed associations between risk alleles at 7p21.1 and plaque characteristics.
Targeted inhibition of HDAC9 might be a viable strategy to prevent atherosclerosis.
The ability of a pulsed oxygen delivery system (Puritan-Bennett Companion Oxygen Saver (COS-5) to track respiratory rate during exercise and the oxygenation achieved during the exercise while oxygen was being delivered by this system was compared to that attained while oxygen was delivered continuously in six patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and six patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF).
Peripheral blood monocyte surface marker (CD14, CD16, CD163, CSF1R, CCR2, CCR4, CCR5, CXCR3, CXCR4, CX3CR1, HLA-DR, CD62L, SIGLEC-1) expression and capacity for phagocytosis, oxidative burst and LPS-stimulated TNF production were assessed in patients with hepatitis C (HCV) (n = 39) or non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) (n = 34) (classified as non-advanced disease, compensated cirrhosis and decompensated cirrhosis) and healthy controls (n = 11) by flow cytometry.
Soluble CD163 (sCD163), a marker of Kupffer cell activation detectable in serum, correlates with inflammation and fibrosis in chronic viral hepatitis, but its role in nonalcoholic fatty liver disease is unknown.
We hypothesized that sCD163 would correlate with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease activity and fibrosis.
dermatoses presenting with erythematous-desquamative patches/plaques (plaque psoriasis, eczematous dermatitis, pityriasis rosea, mycosis fungoides and subacute cutaneous lupus erythematosus), papulosquamous/papulokeratotic dermatoses (lichen planus, pityriasis rosea, papulosquamous sarcoidosis, guttate psoriasis, pityriasis lichenoides chronica, classical pityriasis rubra pilaris, porokeratosis, lymphomatoid papulosis, papulosquamous chronic GVHD, parakeratosis variegata, Grover disease, Darier disease and BRAF-inhibitor-induced acantholytic dyskeratosis), facial inflammatory skin diseases (rosacea, seborrheic dermatitis, discoid lupus erythematosus, sarcoidosis, cutaneous leishmaniasis, lupus vulgaris, granuloma faciale and demodicidosis), acquired keratodermas (chronic hand eczema, palmar psoriasis, keratoderma due to mycosis fungoides, keratoderma resulting from pityriasis rubra pilaris, tinea manuum, palmar lichen planus and aquagenic palmar keratoderma), sclero-atrophic dermatoses (necrobiosis lipoidica, morphea and cutaneous lichen sclerosus), hypopigmented macular diseases (extragenital guttate lichen sclerosus, achromic pityriasis versicolor, guttate vitiligo, idiopathic guttate hypomelanosis, progressive macular hypomelanosis and postinflammatory hypopigmentations), hyperpigmented maculopapular diseases (pityriasis versicolor, lichen planus pigmentosus, Gougerot-Carteaud syndrome, Dowling-Degos disease, erythema ab igne, macular amyloidosis, lichen amyloidosus, friction melanosis, terra firma-forme dermatosis, urticaria pigmentosa and telangiectasia macularis eruptiva perstans), itchy papulonodular dermatoses (hypertrophic lichen planus, prurigo nodularis, nodular scabies and acquired perforating dermatosis), erythrodermas (due to psoriasis, atopic dermatitis, mycosis fungoides, pityriasis rubra pilaris and scabies), noninfectious balanitis (Zoon's plasma cell balanitis, psoriatic balanitis, seborrheic dermatitis and non-specific balanitis) and erythroplasia of Queyrat, inflammatory cicatricial alopecias (scalp discoid lupus erythematosus, lichen planopilaris, frontal fibrosing alopecia and folliculitis decalvans), nonscarring alopecias (alopecia areata, trichotillomania, androgenetic alopecia and telogen effluvium) and scaling disorders of the scalp (tinea capitis, scalp psoriasis, seborrheic dermatitis and pityriasis amiantacea).
Kaposi varicelliform eruption or eczema herpeticum is well known to be associated with several chronic dermatoses, including atopic dermatitis, foliaceus pemphigus, seborrheic dermatitis, Darier disease, and congenital ichthyosiform erythroderma.
MCI-186, a dose that prevents ischemic brain edema, had no significant effect on brain concentrations of dopamine, norepinephrine, 5-hydroxytryptamine, or their metabolites.
Pretreatments with dexamethasone, parachlorophenylalanine (an inhibitor of 5-hydroxytryptamine synthesis), mepyramine and metiamide (H1 and H2 histamine receptor antagonists) or aminophylline did not influence significantly the development of brain edema evaluated 24 h after embolization.
To study the effect of B lymphocyte-induced mature protein-1(Blimp1) expression in bone marrow mononuclear cells on the prognosis of patients with multiple myeloma.
Here we further dissect the anti-myeloma mechanisms mediated by EZH2 inhibition and show that pharmacological inhibition of EZH2 reduces the expression of MM-associated oncogenes; IRF-4, XBP-1, PRDM1/BLIMP-1 and c-MYC.
To investigate the expression level of B lymphocyte-induced maturation protein-1(Blimp-1) mRNA in bone marrow mononuclear cells(BMMNC) of multiple myeloma(MM) patients and its clinical significance.
Meanwhile, plasma could promote myeloma differentiation by up-regulating Blimp-1 and XBP-1 expression.
However, how Blimp-1 ensures the survival of plasma cell malignancy, multiple myeloma (MM), has remained elusive.
The finding that Blimp-1/PRDM1 enhances transcription of CS1 gene in multiple myeloma cells may help in developing novel strategies for therapeutic intervention in multiple myeloma.
Lhx9 is an LIM (named for the first three proteins in which the domain was found, Lin-11, Isl1 and Mec-3) homeodomain protein involved in development and differentiation of the gonad.
We report that CCRL2-deficient mice have a defect in neutrophil recruitment and are protected in 2 models of inflammatory arthritis.
The concurrence of PJS and feminizing SCTs of the testes is an increasingly recognized cause of prepubertal gynecomastia.
Most IgAD and CVID patients in our clinic population in the Southeastern United States have inherited part or all of two extended MHC haplotypes, referred to as haplotype 1 (HLA-DQB1 0201, HLA-DR3, C4B-Sf, C4A-0, G1-15, Bf-0.4, C2-a, HSP-7.5, TNF alpha-5, HLA-B8, HLA-A1) and haplotype 2 (HLA-DQB1 0201, HLA-DR-7, C4B-S, C4A-L, G11-4.5, Bf-0.6, C2-b, HSP-9, TNF alpha-9, HLA-B44, HLA-A29).
In search of a genetic linkage between the two immunodeficiencies, we examined the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class III genes encoding complement components C2, C4A, and C4B and steroid 21-hydroxylase in addition to the HLA serotypes in individuals with either common variable immunodeficiency or IgA deficiency.
Twelve of 19 patients with common variable immunodeficiency (63%, P less than 0.001) and 9 of 16 patients with IgA deficiency (56%, P less than 0.01) had rare C2 alleles and/or C4A and 21-hydroxylase A deletions, whereas these gene features were seen in only 5 of 34 healthy individuals (15%) in the control group.
Totally implantable venous access port (TIVAP)-related infections (RIs) remain a serious health problem in cancer patients receiving an intravenous (i.v.)
Furthermore, we provided a RIs-based algorithm for biomarker discovery and validation to screen for diseases such as cancer.
The first survey, sent to 94 cancer control and supportive care responsible individuals (CCL RIs) at 94 COG institutions, asked if the institution had a standardized approach to practice and focused on antiemetic agent choice.
Liver sections from patients with biliary atresia were evaluated to detect antigen for the BECs marker 4 and cytokeratin-7 (CK-7), proteins (fibroblast-specific protein 1, also known S100A4; the collagen chaperone heat shock protein 47, HSP47) characteristically expressed by cells undergoing EMT, as well as myofibroblasts marker a-smooth muscle actin (a-SMA).
However, BECs from biliary atresia resulted in increased expression of a-SMA, S100A4, with concurrent transition to a fibroblast-like morphology and decreased expression of AK-7.
Consequently, there has been considerable interest in the pharmaceutical industry to develop selective TPL-2 inhibitors as drugs for the treatment of TNF-dependent inflammatory diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis and inflammatory bowel disease.
Thus, pharmacologic inhibition of Tpl2 should be a valid approach to therapeutic intervention in the pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis and other inflammatory diseases in humans.
Taken together, our results show that inhibition of Tpl2 in primary human cell types can decrease the production of TNFalpha and other pro-inflammatory mediators during inflammatory events, and they further support the notion that Tpl2 is an appropriate therapeutic target for rheumatoid arthritis and other human inflammatory diseases.
Recent studies using Tpl2 knockout mice have indicated an important role for Tpl2 in the lipopolysaccharide (LPS) induced production of tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha) and other proinflammatory cytokines involved in diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis.
In all, 78.08% had stage 1 HTN while 22% had stage 2 HTN.
Moreover, ba-PWV showed a significant increase with increasing plasma tHcy level in subjects with both high normal BP and grade 1 HTN (p &lt; 0.05).
Compared with optimal BP stage, ba-PWV was significantly associated with high normal BP stage (Beta = 193, p &lt; 0.001) and grade 1 HTN (Beta = 413, p &lt; 0.001).There was a statistical interaction effect between high normal BP stage and optimal BP stage (p = 0.045).
The similar result was found between subjects with optimal BP and those with grade 1 HTN (p = 0.037).
In conclusion, tHcy was independently correlated with ba-PWV in subjects with high normal BP and grade 1 HTN.
High normal BP and grade 1 HTN may worsen the impact of tHcy on arterial stiffness in a Chinese rural community population.
NpeAMeToM npoAonXahweNcR ANcKyccNN RBnReTcR npoBeAeHNe EKcTpeHHblx EHAapTepEKToMNN N TpoMbNHTNMEKToMNN y namyNeHToB c NHcynbToM B xoAy, crescendo TNA, ocTpoN oKKnh3NeN BHyTpeHHeN coHHoN apTepNN.
The upper bound of a 95% confidence interval for the difference in prevalence of Stage 1 and 2 HTN between study arms indicates that discontinuation of study medication is unlikely to be associated with an increase in Stage 1 HTN of &gt;4.8 percentage points and in Stage 2 HTN of no &gt;5.8 percentage points.
Target genes (e.g., cyclin-dependent kinase 6) of hsa-miR-942-5p were mainly enriched in cancer-related pathways, whereas target genes (e.g., CRK-Like Proto-Oncogene, Adaptor Protein) of hsa-miR-940 were enriched in the ErbB signaling pathway.
Herein, we demonstrated that hypoxia induces the high expression of microRNA-940 (miR-940) in exosomes derived from epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC).
Results: Expressions of hsa-mir-1180, hsa-mir-149, hsa-mir-744 and hsa-mir-940 were all up regulated in high invasion capable cell lines (SNU423, SNU449) and vascular invasion patients with hepatocellular carcinoma (logFC&gt;1, P&lt;0.05).
Results from the Survival analysis showed that hsa-mir-1180 (HR=1.623, 95% CI: 1.114-2.365, P=0.012), hsa-mir-149 (HR=2.400, 95% CI: 1.639-3.514) and hsa-mir-940 (HR=1.704, 95%CI: 1.188-2.443, P=0.004) were independent risk factors on the prognosis of patients with hepatocellular carcinoma (P&lt;0.05).
Conclusion: With TCGA and GEO data mining, we found that hsa-mir-1180, hsa-mir-149, hsa-mir-744 and hsa-mir-940 were all highly related to the prognosis of hepatocellular carcinoma, that enabled it to be used to further study the biomarkers related to the prognosis of hepatocellular carcinoma.
### ###GEO (Gene Expression Omnibus) #TCGA (The Cancer Genome Atlas) #####, ###########microRNA, ############ ### ##GEO###########microRNA#### (GSE67140) , #5########### (SNU423#SNU449#HepG2#Hep3B#SNU398) #########, ##81############91#######################TCGA####362############, ##microRNA########GO#KEGG### ### hsa-mir-1180#hsa-mir-149#hsa-mir-744#hsa-mir-940########################### (logFC&gt;1, P&lt;0.05) #######, hsa-mir-1180 (HR=1.623, 95%CI#1.114~2.365, P=0.012) #hsa-mir-149 (HR=2.400, 95% CI#1.639~3.514, P&lt;0.001) #hsa-mir-744 (HR=1.679, 95%CI#1.161~2.427, P=0.006) #hsa-mir-940 (HR=1.704, 95%CI#1.188~2.443, P=0.004) #############, ############### (P&lt;0.05) #GO#KEGG############################## ### ###TCGA#GEO######, ####hsa-mir-1180#hsa-mir-149#hsa-mir-744#hsa-mir-940#########, ##############.
The high expression of miR-940 is associated with better survival in patients with ovarian serous cystadenocarcinoma.
In our study, real-time (RT) quantitative PCR indicated that miR-940 levels were upregulated in human cervical cancer tissue samples and cell lines.
Ectopic miR-940 accelerated cervical cancer cell growth, proliferation and cell cycle arrest in vitro as well as tumor formation in vivo.
p27 and PTEN were evidenced as direct targets for miR-940 and inhibition of p27 and PTEN recovered the suppressive function of miR-940-silenced cell towards to proliferation and tumorigenicity in cervical cancer cells.
In addition, miR-940 expression was inversely associated with p27 and PTEN expression levels and actively with cyclin D1 in cervical cancer specimens.
The results from our study demonstrated that miR-940 regulated p27 and PTEN post-transcriptionally and might play a significant role in cervical cancer development and progression.
Thus, miR-940 might provide a potential value as therapeutic target for cervical cancer treatment in future.
We aimed to explore the roles and regulatory mechanism of microRNA-940 (miR-940) in bladder cancer development.
The expressions of miR-940 in bladder cancer tissues and cells were measured.
miR-940 was up-regulated in bladder cancer tissues and cells.
Overexpression of miR-940 significantly increased bladder cancer cell proliferation, promoted migration and invasion, and inhibited cell apoptosis.
INPP4A and GSK3Beta were the direct targets of miR-940, and knockdown of INPP4A or GSK3Beta significantly increased cancer cell proliferation, migration and invasion, and inhibited cell apoptosis.
Our results indicate that overexpression of miR-940 may promote bladder cancer cell proliferation, migration and invasion, and inhibited cell apoptosis via targeting INPP4A or GSK3Beta and activating Wnt/Beta-catenin pathway.
Expressions of miR-940, miR-15a, miR-16 and IL-23 in PTC tissues might be useful biomarkers and promising targets in the diagnosis of papillary thyroid carcinoma.
This study investigated the pivotal role of miR-940 in the progression of ovarian cancer and to reveal the possible molecular mechanism of its action.
Ovarian cancer OVCAR3 cells were transfected with the miR-940 vector, miR-940 inhibitor, and/or small interfering RNA (siRNA) targeting PKC-Delta (si-PKC-Delta), respectively.
Taken together, the results of our study suggest that upregulation of miR-940 may function as a suppressor in the progression of ovarian cancer by inhibiting cell proliferation and inducing apoptosis by targeting PKC-Delta.
This study may provide a basis for the possible application of miR-940 in illustrating the molecular pathogenic mechanism of ovarian cancer.
To investigate the expression of miR-940 in the hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and its impact on function and biological mechanism in the HCC cells.
Gene variants known to contribute to Autoimmune Addison's disease (AAD) susceptibility include those at the MHC, MICA, CIITA, CTLA4, PTPN22, CYP27B1, NLRP-1 and CD274 loci.
NLRP1 is genetically associated with risk of several autoimmune diseases including generalized vitiligo, Addison disease, type 1 diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis, and others.
Investigating large patient cohorts from six different autoimmune diseases, that is autoimmune Addison's disease (n=333), type 1 diabetes (n=1086), multiple sclerosis (n=502), rheumatoid arthritis (n=945), systemic lupus erythematosus (n=156) and juvenile idiopathic arthritis (n=505), against 3273 healthy controls, we analyzed four single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in NALP1.
Forty-four formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded MRCL samples and 60 control cases (atypical/well-differentiated liposarcoma, pleomorphic liposarcoma, low-grade myofibrosarcoma, etc.)
The most frequent acupoints of acupuncture for PCOS were Sanyinjiao (SP 6), Guanyuan (CV 4), Zigong (EX-CA 1), Zhongji (CV 3) and Qihai (CV 6).
In the modern treatment of acupuncture for PCOS, Sanyinjiao (SP 6), Guanyuan (CV 4), Zigong (EX-CA 1), Zhongii (CV 3) and Qihai (CV 6) are most used.
Carbonic anhydrase II (CA II) has an important role in thyroid hormone synthesis via regulating iodide (I-) transport across thyroidal cell membranes and the existence of autoantibodies against CA I and/or CA II have been shown in sera from patient with various autoimmune diseases such as Sjoegren's Syndrome, Systemic Lupus Erythmatosus, type 1 diabetes, primary biliary cirrhosis and ulcerative colitis.
Efforts to inhibit the chemokine receptor CCR9 using the agent CCX282-B in Crohn's disease were not successful.
Other therapeuticals that might find their way to the market the coming years include the anti-mucosal vascular addressin cell adhesion molecule (MAdCAM) PF-00547659, small molecules (including laquinimod and the CCR9 antagonist Vercirnon), as well as an orally active SMAD7 antisense oligonucleotide that showed clinical benefit in Crohn's disease patients.
The chemokine CCL25, and its receptor CCR9, constitute a unique chemokine/receptor pair, which regulates trafficking of T lymphocytes to the small intestine under physiological conditions and is an attractive target for small bowel Crohn's disease drug development.
Vercirnon is a CCR9 chemokine receptor antagonist being developed for the treatment of Crohn's disease.
It is well established that the passive trans-placental passage of anti-Ro/SSA antibodies from mother to foetus is associated with the risk to develop an uncommon syndrome named neonatal lupus (NLE), where the congenital heart block represents the most severe clinical feature.
The characteristics of NLE that were studied included congenital complete heart block (CCHB), second degree heart block, and hepatic fibrosis.
Sera from patients known to frequently produce precipitating anti-SS-A/Ro antibody (subacute cutaneous lupus erythematosus [SCLE], 56 patients; Sjoegren's syndrome [SS], 41 patients; mothers of infants with neonatal LE [NLE], 10 individuals; infants with congenital heart block [CHB], 5 patients) were tested for reactivity to RoSP7-24 in ELISA.
NLE is manifested most typically as transient subacute cutaneous lupus lesions or isolated complete congenital heart block.
Our findings also suggested that the inhibitory effects of AC-93253 iodide on lung cancer progression may be attributable to its ability to modulate multiple proteins, including Src, PI3K, JNK, Paxillin, p130cas, MEK, ERK, and EGFR.
Paxillin and FAK activity are reduced in lung cancer cell lines following wiskostatin and nWASP knockdown as shown by immunofluorescence and western blot.
Taken together, these results suggested that treatment with DBL may act as a potential candidate to inhibit lung cancer metastasis by inhibiting MMP-2 and -9 via affecting PI3K/AKT, MAPKs, FAK/paxillin, EMT/Snail and Slug, Nrf2/antioxidant enzymes, and NFKB signaling pathways.
EL decreased phosphorylation of FAK and its downstream targets, Src, paxillin, and decreased mRNA expression of cell motility-related genes, RhoA, Rac1, and Cdc42 in lung cancer cells.
It efficiently inhibits metastasis on NSCLC by reducing vascularization, and eliciting depression of the PI3K-AKT and FAK-Paxillin signaling pathways.
Here, we assessed the impact of CD101 on the course of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD).
Using a T-cell transfer model of chronic colitis, we found that in recipients of naive T cells from CD101(+/+) donors up to 30% of the recovered lymphocytes expressed CD101, correlating with an increased interleukin (IL)-2-mediated FoxP3 expression.
Transfer of CD101(-/-) T cells caused more severe colitis and was associated with an expansion of IL-17-producing T cells and an enhanced expression of IL-2RAlfa/Beta independently of FoxP3.
The co-transfer of naive and regulatory T cells (Treg) protected most effectively from colitis, when both donor and recipient mice expressed CD101.
Thus, CD101 deficiency is a novel marker for progressive colitis and potential target for therapeutic intervention.
Subgroups of T cells (Th : CD4(+) or Tc : CD8(+) ); naive (CD27(+) CD28(+) CD45RA(+) CCR7(+) ), central memory (CD27(+) CD28(+) CD45RA(-) CCR7(+) ), effector memory (early differentiated; CD27(+) CD28(+) CD45RA(-) CCR7(-) and late differentiated; CD27(-) CD28(-) CD45RA(-) CCR7(-) ), terminally differentiated effector cells (TEMRA; CD27(-) CD28(-) CD45RA(+) CCR7(-) ) and Treg (CD4(+) CD25(+) FOXP3(+) CD127(-) ) cells, and their expression of CD39, CD45RA, CD101 and CD129, were studied by flow cytometry in T1D and/or coeliac disease children or without any of these diseases (reference group).
Children with exclusively coeliac disease had a higher MFI of CD101 (P &lt; 0*01), as well as a higher percentage of CD129(+) (P &lt; 0*05), in the CD4(+) CD25(hi) lymphocyte population, compared to references.
Conversely, children with coeliac disease show signs of CD101(+) /CD129(+) Treg cells that may indicate suppressor activity.
Further, to define the mechanism of action that explains the differential ability of C57BL/6 Treg versus dnTGF-BetaRII Treg on the ability to down-regulate autoimmune cholangitis, we noted significant differential expression of glycoprotein A repetitions predominant (GARP), CD73, CD101 and CD103 and a functionally significant increase in interleukin (IL)-10 in Treg from C57BL/6 compared to dnTGF-BetaRII mice.
CD101-knockout mice generated on the B6 background also exhibit substantially more severe N. aromaticivorans-induced liver disease correlating with increased IFN-Gamma and IL-17 responses compared with wild-type mice.
Gastric juice from 15 normals, 20 patients with gastric ulcer and 14 patients with erosive haemorrhagic gastroduodenitis was investigated in respect of its activity on unheated and heated fibrin plates and its content of FDP and plasminogen or plasmin with immunochemical methods.
The patients with erosive haemorrhagic gastroduodenitis showed no increase in fibrinolysis in the blood, but low values for plasminogen and alpha2-M, and the serum contained FDP.
In the patient's lymphocytes, mRNA expression of TGFBeta2 was lower than control, and might cause DORV as it does in TGFBeta2-deficient mice.
Activin BA, follistatin, and activin receptor type IIA proteins were observed in normal and cleft palate tissues throughout pregnancy (gestational weeks 11 to 40).
We have previously shown that follistatin-deficient mice have numerous embryonic defects including shiny, taut skin, growth retardation, and cleft palate leading to death within hours of birth.
Two rheumatic disease patients had a relatively high titer of IgG(2)anti-p80-coilin antibodies.
The IgG(2)subclass of anti-p80-coilin antibodies may be a specific marker for systemic autoimmune disease.
The patients with localized scleroderma who were positive for anti-p80-coilin antibody had all been classified as having linear scleroderma.
Our data indicate that anti-p80-coilin antibody is uncommon in skin diseases: however, this antibody is present in patients with a milder form of linear scleroderma, although the incidence of positivity may not be high.
We also discuss several of the antigen-autoantibody systems found in systemic lupus erythematosus (Smith antigen, U1-nuclear ribonucleoprotein, SS-A/Ro, SS-B/La, proliferating cell nuclear antigen ribosomal ribonucleoprotein, double-strand DNA, histones, antiphospholipids, Ku, Ki/SL), systemic sclerosis (centromere, topo I, RNA polymerases, fibrillarin, polymyositis-Scl, Th/To), polymyositis/dermatomyositis (transferRNA synthetases, signal recognition particle, and others), and SS (SS-A/Ro, SS-B/La, nucleolar organizing region-90, p80-coilin), addressing their clinical significance, common detection methods, immunogenetic associations, and the molecular and cellular biology of the cognate antigens.
However, IL-17 deficiency did not affect the development of dermatitis at all, in clear contrast to that of arthritis and aortitis.
The development of arthritis and aortitis was significantly suppressed by the deficiency of TNFalpha or IL-17.
Apolipoprotein E (ApoE) has been extensively studied in Alzheimer's disease (AD), but little is known of apolipoprotein A-I (ApoA-I) in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF).
Objective To evaluate the efficacy of Ganoderma lucidum preparation on the behaviors,biochemistry,and autoimmunity parameters of mouse models of APP/PS-1 double transgenic Alzheimer's disease(AD).Methods A total of 44 4-month-old APP/PS-1 double transgenic AD mice were randomly divided into AD model group,Aricept group,Ganoderma lucidum middle-dose(LZ-M)group,and Ganoderma lucidum high-dose(LZ-H)group,with 11 mice in each group.In addition,10 4-month-old C57BL/6 mice were used as the control group.Water maze test was conducted to observe the behavior changes,and the protein expressions in brain tissues were detected by Western blot analysis.The autoimmune indicators were detected by indirect immunofluorescence method.Results In the navigation experiment,the time of finding the platform was gradually shortened since the 2nd day in the control,LZ-H,and LZ-M groups,and the time of searching the platform in the AD model group gradually increased.On the 5th day,the time of finding platform was significantly shorter in control group (t=5.607,P=0.000) and LZ-H group(t=2.750,P=0.010)than AD model group.In the space exploration experiment,the number of crossing the target platform(t=2.452,P=0.025)and the residence time in the target quadrant(t=2.530,P=0.020)in AD model group mice was significantly smaller/shorter than those in control group;in addition,the number of crossing the target platform in the AD model group was significantly smaller than that in LZ-H group(t=2.317,P=0.030)and LZ-M group(t=2.443,P=0.030),while the residence time in target quadrant decreased significantly(t=2.770,P=0.020)compared with LZ-H group;the number of crossing through the target platform quadrant(t=2.493,P=0.022)and residence time in the target quadrant(t=2.683,P=0.015)in LZ-H group were significantly higher than in Aricept group.Western blot analysis showed that the expression of ApoA1 in the brain tissues of mice in LZ-H and LZ-M groups were significantly higher than those in AD model group(P&lt;0.01,P&lt;0.05);ABeta-40 expression in LZ-H group was significantly lower than that in AD model group(P&lt;0.05);the expressions of Syt1,ApoE,and ABCA1 in brain tissues of mice in LZ-H group were significantly higher than those in model group(P&lt;0.01,P&lt;0.05).The plasma IgG level in Aricept group(t=30.945,P=0.000),LZ-M group(t=25.639,P=0.000)and LZ-H group(t=4.689,P=0.001)were significantly higher than that in the control group.Conclusion Ganoderma lucidum preparation can improve behavior disorders of AD model mice,promote the expressions of ApoA1,ApoE and Syt1,inhibit the expression of ABeta-40 protein,and improve the autoimmune function.
We aimed to explore the correlations between eukaryotic translation initiation factor 3, subunit A (eIF3a) polymorphisms and susceptibility to and chemoradiotherapy efficacy in cervical carcinoma.
Compared with carriers of the CC genotype, carriers of the T genotype of the eIF3a Arg803Lys C&gt;T polymorphism had a higher risk of cervical carcinoma.
Univariate analysis revealed that age, eIF3a Arg803Lys C&gt;T polymorphism, differentiation degree, FIGO stage, and LNM were prognostic factors of cervical carcinoma, and multivariate analysis showed that age &gt;= 60 years, higher FIGO stage, and LNM, as well as the CT and TT genotypes of the eIF3a Arg803Lys C&gt;T polymorphism, were risk factors related to the prognosis of cervical carcinoma.
The eIF3a Arg803Lys C&gt;T polymorphism is connected with a higher susceptibility to cervical carcinoma and may affect chemoradiotherapy efficacy in and prognosis of cervical carcinoma.
These findings suggest that the p185 neu may be a prognostic indicator not only for breast adenocarcinomas but also for lymphoproliferative disorders, and that the transforming p185 protein may be involved in the mechanisms of aggressive expansion of lymphoid neoplasias.
The authors investigated the correlation between clinicopathologic factors and the overexpression of the p185(HER2) in Korean gastric adenocarcinoma patients, and determined whether the antiproliferative effects of anti- p185(HER2) antibody can also be observed on gastric cancer cell lines that overexpress this growth factor receptor.
We evaluated the relationship between p185(HER2) overexpression and clinicopathological features in 94 (M: F=52: 42) gastric adenocarcinoma patients (median age 59 years).
To explore the role of humanized anti-p185(HER2) monoclonal antibody trastuzumab (Herceptin ) in vitro, the growth curve of Korean gastric cancer cells that overexpress the p185(HER2) protein was studied and a cell cycle analysis was performed.
p185(HER2) overexpression was found to be more frequent in advanced gastric cancer than early gastric cancer (54.1% vs 24.2%, p=0.008).
Among several Korean gastric cancer cell lines, SNU-1, SNU-5, and SNU-620 overexpress p185(HER2).
Trastuzumab inhibited the proliferation of p185(HER2) overexpressed Korean gastric cancer cell line by 21% with down-regulation of p185(HER2) protein expression.
S: Taken together, our observations suggest the potential prognostic significance of p185(HER2) overexpression in Korean gastric adenocarcinoma patients and point to the need for further research on this mechanism.
This suggests the possible use of p185(HER2) as a therapeutic target in gastric cancer.
Administration of trastuzumab, a fully humanized monoclonal antibody targeted to the human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2, p185), has improved outcomes for patients with HER2-positive gastric cancer (GC), but some relevant issues remain to be investigated and will emerge with new anti-GC drugs.
Eukaryotic translation initiation factor 3 subunit A (eIF3a) plays critical roles in regulating the initiation of protein translation, and eIF3a is highly expressed in lung cancer.
In this study, we investigated the association of the positively selected SNPs of eIF3a with the response to and toxicity of platinum-based chemotherapy in Chinese patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
The positively selected SNPs of eIF3a are significantly correlated with platinum-based chemotherapy toxicities in Chinese NSCLC patients.
To investigate the correlation between eukaryotic translation initiation factor 3, subunit A (eIF3a) and human epididymis protein 4 (HE4) expression and ovarian cancer.
RT-PCR or immunohistochemistry was used to examine eIF3a and HE4 mRNA or protein expression in ovarian tissues from patients with ovarian cancer (n=181) or benign ovarian tumors, or from the healthy women.
There were significant differences in mRNA and protein expression of eIF3a and HE4 among normal ovarian tissues, benign ovarian tumor tissues, and ovarian cancer tissues (P&lt; 0.05).
There were significant differences in mRNA expression of eIF3a and HE4 between the normal tissues and the ovarian cancer tissues, or between the benign ovarian tumor tissues and the normal tissues (P&lt; 0.001).
The mRNA expression of eIF3a in the normal ovarian tissues was significantly higher than that in the benign ovarian tumor tissues or that in the ovarian cancer tissues.
Positive expression rates for eIF3a or HE4 protein in normal, benign tumor, and cancer tissues were 0, 66.7%, and 81.0% or 0, 27.8%, and 56.2%, respectively.
There were significant differences in positive expression rates of eIF3a protein and HE4 protein between the ovarian tumor tissues and benign ovarian tumor tissues, between the ovarian cancer tissues and the normal ovarian tissues, or between the benign ovarian tumor tissues and the normal ovarian tissues (P&lt; 0.001).
The expressions of eIF3a and HE4 are associated with ovarian cancer, and extracellular regulated protein kinases may play a role in the interaction between eIF3a and HE4.
We describe an ultrasensitive electrochemical nucleic acid assay amplified by carbon nanotubes (CNTs)-based labels for the detection of human acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL)-related p185 BCR-ABL fusion transcript.
Plasma levels of annexin V-MP, endothelial-derived MP, platelet-derived MP (CD61+ and P-Selectin+), leukocyte-derived MP, tissue factor-bearing (TF+) and CD36+MP were prospectively measured in 20 patients with III degree obesity (BMI &gt;= 40 kg/m(2)) before (T0) and 3 (T3) and 12 (T12) months after sleeve gastrectomy (SLG).
Key messages Bilirubin levels are inversely related to cardiovascular disease, and overexpression of heme oxygenase-1 (the enzyme that determines bilirubin production) has prevented post-infarction ventricular remodeling in experimental animals, but the association between bilirubin levels and the progression of ventricular volumes and function in patients with acute myocardial infarction remained unexplored.
HO-1 is known to be protective in the setting of acute myocardial infarction.
In vitro experiments revealed enteropeptidase as a putative substrate for Bace1 suggesting a role in acute pancreatitis.
acute necrotizing pancreatitis was induced in anesthetized pigs by the retrograde infusion of 1 ml/kg of 5% sodium taurocholate and 8 U/kg enterokinase in the pancreatic duct.
Conversely, duodenopancreatic reflux of proteolytically active enteropeptidase may cause acute and chronic pancreatitis.
A noninvasive model of necrohemorrhagic pancreatitis induced by simultaneous intravenous cerulein/enterokinase (EK) infusion has recently been established in rats.
Study hemodynamic pattern and lipoperoxidation during methylene blue (MB) treatment on taurocholate - enterokinase induced acute pancreatitis (AP).
The HLA-B47,DR7 haplotype in congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency contains a deletion of most of the active CYP21 gene and the entire adjacent C4B gene.
The HLA haplotype A3-Cw6-B47-C4A91-BQ0-DR7 is associated with congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH), since it only carries the dysfunctional steroid 21-hydroxylase A pseudogene as well as the 5' adjacent complement C4A gene.
The mutation of vesicle-associated membrane protein-associated protein B (VAPB) was proved to cause family amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (FALS).
ALS8 is a late-onset familial autosomal dominant form of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) caused by a point mutation (P56S) in the VAPB gene (VAMP associated protein isoform B).
This supports the loss of VAPB function in ALS8 pathogenesis and suggests that reducing intracellular PtdIns4P might be an effective therapeutic strategy in delaying progressive loss of motor neurons.
Mutations in VAP-B that have been identified in familial forms of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS or Lou-Gehrig's disease) cause aggregation of the VAP-B protein, which then impairs its binding to several proteins, including Nir2.
A mutation in VAPB causes a familial form of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis.
We present two cases of Peters anomaly (Peters plus syndrome and a maximum manifestation variant) with abnormally thickened cornea and corneal staphyloma.
Wnt3a and Wnt5a are ligands orchestrating the canonical and non-canonical pathways, respectively, with involvement in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
To investigate member 3a of Wingless-type MMTV integration site family (Wnt3a) expression in cancerous and surrounding tissues and the relationship between clinicopathologic features of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and Wnt3a expression.
We then use a realistic GENESIS model to test two hypothesis about interneuron hypofunction and conclude that a reduction in GAD67 is the most likely candidate as the cause for hypofrontality as observed in Schizophrenia.
The objective of this study was to determine the effect of the CYP3A5 and ATP binding cassette subfamily B member 1 (ABCB1) single-nucleotide polymorphisms on the disposition of sunitinib and SU12662, on clinical response, and on the manifestation of toxicities in Asian metastatic renal cell carcinoma patients.
Polymorphisms in VEGFR3 and CYP3A5*1 might be able to define a subset of patients with renal-cell carcinoma with decreased sunitinib response and tolerability.
To examine whether common genetic variation at the SLC10A1 locus is associated with risk of persistent HBV infection, haplotype-tagging and imputed single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were assessed in two case-control sample sets, totally including 2,550 cases (persistently HBV infected subjects, PIs) and 2,124 controls (spontaneously recovered subjects, SRs) of Southern Chinese ancestry.
The effectiveness of topical terbinafine (TBF) to tinea pedis was evaluated an animal model in which guinea pigs were experimentally infected through their planta pedis with Trichophyton mentagrophytes, then a 1% TBF or butenafine (BTF) cream was administered topically once daily for 4 consecutive weeks.
However, mutations in RecQL4 result in three human disorders: (I) Rothmund-Thomson syndrome (RTS), (II) RAPADILINO and (III) Baller-Gerold syndrome (BGS).
This is in accordance with clinical and epidemiological findings demonstrating that defects in three RecQL helicases, i.e., WRN, BLM, RECQL4, are related to human progeroid and cancer predisposition syndromes, i.e., Werner, Bloom, and Rothmund Thomson syndrome, respectively.
Human RecQ homologs include RECQ1, BLM, WRN, RECQ4, and RECQ5Beta, three of which have been linked to diseases with elevated risk of cancer and growth defects (Bloom Syndrome and Rothmund-Thomson Syndrome) or premature aging (Werner Syndrome).
Depletion of PAICS largely cancelled breast cancer expansion, exemplifying a prognostic gene with breast cancer activity.
We propose that pharmacological inhibition of components within this network, such as PAICS, may be used in conjunction with the Fra-1 prognostic classifier towards personalized management of poor prognosis breast cancer.
Our goal was to investigate de novo purine biosynthetic gene PAICS expression and evaluate its role in prostate cancer progression.
Next-generation sequencing, qRTPCR and immunoblot analysis revealed an elevated expression of a de novo purine biosynthetic gene, Phosphoribosylaminoimidazole Carboxylase, Phosphoribosylaminoimidazole Succinocarboxamide Synthetase (PAICS) in a progressive manner in prostate cancer.
Through several in vitro and in vivo functional studies, we show that PAICS is necessary for proliferation and invasion in prostate cancer cells.
We identified JQ1, a BET bromodomain inhibitor previously implicated in regulating MYC expression and demonstrated role in prostate cancer, abrogates PAICS expression in several prostate cancer cells.
Here, we report that evaluation of PAICS in prostate cancer progression and its role in prostate cancer cell proliferation and invasion and suggest it as a valid therapeutic target.
We suggest JQ1, a BET-domain inhibitor, as possible therapeutic option in targeting PAICS in prostate cancer.
We discovered increased expression of phosphoribosyl amidotransferase (PPAT) and phosphoribosylaminoimidazole carboxylase, phosphoribosylaminoimidazole succinocarboxamide synthetase (PAICS) enzymes of de novo purine biosynthetic pathway in lung adenocarcinomas.
Transcript analyses from next-generation RNA sequencing and gene expression profiling studies suggested that PPAT and PAICS can serve as prognostic biomarkers for aggressive lung adenocarcinoma.
Furthermore we identified genomic amplification and aneuploidy of the divergently transcribed PPAT-PAICS genomic region in a subset of lung cancers.
In summary, this study reveals the regulatory mechanisms by which purine biosynthetic pathway enzymes PPAT and PAICS, and pyruvate kinase activity is increased and exposes an existing metabolic vulnerability in lung cancer cells that can be explored for pharmacological intervention.
We also identified mutations in four genes (MUC19, PAICS, RBMXL1, KIF23) never reported in melanoma, which might deserve further investigations.
Alterations in PAICS expression in humans have been associated with various types of cancer.
An IST1 clone, detected for the first time in 2000, was the most prevalent and responsible for the shigellosis epidemic in 2001 to 2003.
In this observational, cross-sectional study, circulating levels of sclerostin and other laboratory parameters of mineral and bone disease, including intact parathyroid hormone (PTH), calcium, phosphate, magnesium, 25(OH) D-vitamin, 1,25 (OH)2 D-vitamin, and bone specific alkaline phosphatase (BALP) were assessed in 100 patients with end-stage renal disease recruited from an ongoing longitudinal cohort study in Stockholm, Sweden.
Findings from research into mineral bone disorder associated with CKD (CKD-MBD) could help the medical community to better understand the vascular actions of certain molecules, such as phosphates, fibroblast growth factor 23, parathyroid hormone, sclerostin, or vitamin D and their relevance to the management of different pathologies in the general population.
In chronic kidney disease (CKD), sclerostin is a putative driver of the bone-vascular axis.
Clinical inference relating sclerostin levels found in the general, CKD and dialysis populations is largely influenced by the assay used to measure this biomarker.
(3) Compared with the control group, the expression of CD63 in basophils increased in anaphylactic shock lung tissue.
To elucidate a potential mechanism involving BM88/Cend1, RanBPM and Dyrk1B in cell cycle progression/exit, we transiently co-expressed these proteins in mouse neuroblastoma Neuro 2a cells.
Calcium imaging experiments revealed that P2Y-induced calcium mobilization is diminished in mouse neuroblastoma Neuro 2a cells stably transfected with BM88 (N2A-BM88 cells) as compared with N2A cells or N2A cells differentiated with retinoic acid.
We report here that trichostatin-A (TSA) specifically induces the transcription of Cend1, a neuronal-lineage specific regulator of cell cycle exit and differentiation, in neuroblastoma Neuro2A cells, but not in non-neuronal cells.
Here we have used mouse neuroblastoma Neuro 2a cells as an in vitro model of neuronal differentiation to dissect the functional properties of BM88 by implementing gain- and loss-of-function approaches.
BM88 overexpression also results in increased levels of the cell cycle regulatory protein p53, and accumulation of the hypophosphorylated form of the retinoblastoma protein leading to cell cycle arrest, with concomitant decreased levels and, in many cells, cytoplasmic localization of cyclin D1.
Previous studies have shown that the BM88 antigen, a neuron-specific molecule, promotes the differentiation of mouse neuroblastoma cells [23] (Mamalaki A., Boutou E., Hurel C., Patsavoudi E., Tzartos S. and Matsas R. (1995) The BM88 antigen, a novel neuron-specific molecule, enhances the differentiation of mouse neuroblastoma cells.
Moreover, they respond differentially to growth factors [10] (Gomez J., Boutou E., Hurel C., Mamalaki A., Kentroti S. , Vernadakis A. and Matsas R. (1998) Overexpression of the neuron-specific molecule BM88 in mouse neuroblastoma cells: Altered responsiveness to growth factors.
Previous studies have shown that the BM88 antigen, a novel neuron-specific molecule, promotes the differentiation of mouse neuroblastoma (Neuro 2a) cells.
In conclusion, our findings show that overexpression of the neuron-specific antigen BM88 in neuroblastoma cells modifies their properties with respect to growth factor sensitivity, and, hence, the Neuro 2a and Neuro 2a-BM88 are suitable cell models to examine the role of growth factors in neuronal differentiation.
Here, we investigated the expression stabilities of ten previously recommended reference genes (ABCT, CYP, EF1A, FBOX, GPDH, RPL30, TUA4, TUB4, TUA5, and UNK2) in soybean under biotic stress from Bean pod mottle virus (BPMV), powdery mildew (PMD), soybean aphid (SBA), and two-spotted spider mite (TSSM).
In conclusion, the anti-B7-1 antibody approach may provide a novel therapy for allergic asthma.
To investigate whether there is altered expression and the clinical significance of soluble co-stimulatory molecules in asthmatic patients, plasma concentrations of sCTLA-4, sCD28, sCD80 and sCD86 in 51 adult allergic asthmatic adults with or without steroid treatment, and 35 sex- and age-matched control subjects were measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
The surface expression of T cell costimulatory molecules CTLA-4 and CD28 and their counter-ligands, B7 molecules (CD80, CD86), is differentially induced for T cell activation and expansion in allergic asthma.
Plasma concentrations of soluble CTLA-4 (sCTLA-4), CD28, CD80 and CD86 in 51 children with chronic allergic asthma with or without inhaled corticosteroid treatment, and 22 sex- and age-matched control subjects were measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.
Plasma sCTLA-4, sCD28 and sCD80 concentrations are elevated in allergic asthma.
The percentage of myoglobin denaturation (PMD) of the CA groups was also increased according to the level of CA during storage.
Low expression of (or IHC-negative) COX2, miR-200c, ERCC1 and TS, or high expression of (or IHC-positive) CDC25B and p16 are potential biomarkers for predicting the response of esophageal cancer patients treated with chemo(radio)therapy.
ERCC1-SNP in combination with mRNA ERCC1, DPYD, and ERBB2 from pretherapeutic endoscopic biopsies can predict minor response to chemoradiation, as a basis for individualized therapy of advanced esophageal cancer.
ERCC1 C118T could be a predictive factor for the response to radiotherapy and chemotherapy, but not a prognostic factor for OS in esophageal cancer patients after surgery.
In the present meta-analysis, we demonstrated that the ERCC1 rs3212986 polymorphism was significantly correlated with the response rate of esophageal cancer patients to neoadjuvant therapy (OR =  .49, 95% CI = 0.31-0.76, heterogeneity P = 0.480).
Furthermore, a considerable correlation was observed between ERCC1 rs11615 and the response rate of esophageal cancer patients to neoadjuvant therapy (OR = 0.228, 95% CI = 0.125-0.418, heterogeneity P = 0.291).
These findings indicate that the ERCC1 rs11615 and ERCC1 rs312986 polymorphisms may be candidate pharmacogenomic factors capable of predicting the response rate of esophageal cancer patients who accept neoadjuvant therapy.
In patients with colon cancer, the expression of TSP50, MAGE-A(1-6), and SSX1,2,4 genes was associated with a poor prognosis, that of MAGE-C1 and XAGE1 was related to a favorable prognosis.
Consequently, the expression of CT antigens MAGE-A1, MAGE-A4, CT7/MAGE-C1, NY-ESO-1, and GAGE was analyzed in a series of pediatric melanomas.
In this study, we show that the dying myeloma cells treated with chaetocin resulted in the induction of heat shock protein (HSP) 90, which was inhibited by antioxidant N-acetyl cysteine, and showed an increase in the expression of MAGE-A3 and MAGE-C1/CT7.
We used immunohistochemistry to examine the expression of four CTAs (MAGE-A, NY-ESO-1, CT7, and GAGE7) in various types of salivary gland carcinoma (n = 95).
When carcinoma cases were divided into low-grade and intermediate/high-grade types, NY-ESO-1 and CT7 were expressed more frequently in intermediate/high-grade carcinomas.
The expression of cancer testis antigen MAGE C1 has been linked to the malignant stem cell in this disease, and thus, we investigated the use of both flow cytometric and qRTPCR approaches to monitor its expression as an alternative monitoring methodology in this pilot study.
These variants were found in genes associated with cancers (ANKRD35, DNAH9, MAGEC1, TOX3) or participating in cancer-related signaling pathways (THSD1, MORN2, PTCRA).
Our study aims to analyze the expression pattern, mechanism, and prognostic significance of melanoma-associated antigen MAGE-C1 and MAGE-C2 in breast cancer.
Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and immunohistochemistry were used to investigate the expressions of MAGE-C1 and MAGE-C2 in breast benign disease specimens, tumor-free breast specimens, and breast cancer specimens; their correlation with clinicopathologic parameters and recurrence-free survival was elucidated.
We examined the influence of DNA methylase inhibitor 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-aza-CdR) together with histone deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin A on the expression of MAGE-C1 and MAGE-C2 in breast cancer cell lines.
Proteins for MAGE-C1 and MAGE-C2 expressions were 38.3% and 58.3% in breast cancer specimens, messenger RNA for MAGE-C1 and MAGE-C2 expressions were 43.3% and 61.7%, respectively.
MAGE-C1 and MAGE-C2 maybe potential targets for tumor immunotherapy, and their expressions are associated with advanced breast cancer and poor outcome.
As CT7 and CT10 are highly expressed in cutaneous melanoma and are immunogenic in this disease, we analysed their expression throughout the different subtypes of mucosal melanoma and tumor development.
In the present study, we investigated expression patterns of nanog in the rat heart after acute myocardial infarction by semi-quantitative RT-PCR, immunohistochemistry and Western blot analyses.
MRI represents the gold standard tool for differential diagnosis (with schwannoma, paraganglioma and haemangioma) and correct staging, while immunohistochemical and cytomorphologic analysis (bcl-2 and CD34 positivity in 90% of cases) is needed for definitive diagnosis.
L'RMN rappresenta l'esame principale per escludere altre diagnosi (schwannoma, paragangliome ed emangioma) e per una corretta stadiazione mentre l'immunoistochimica e l'analisi citomorfologica (bcl-2 e CD34 positiva nel 90% dei casi) e la base per una diagnosi definitiva.
Disease-specific iPS cells were generated from skin fibroblasts obtained from the indicated PMD patient and two other PMD patients having a 637-kb chromosomal duplication including entire PLP1 and a novel missense mutation (W212C) of PLP1, by transfections of OCT3/4, C-MYC, KLF4 and SOX2 using retro-virus vectors.
Mice with increased KLF4 in NSCs and NSCs-derived ependymal cells developed hydrocephalus-like characteristics, including enlarged ventricles, thinned cortex, agenesis of the corpus callosum, and significantly reduced subcommissural organ.
These results indicate that down-regulation of KLF4 is critical for neural development and its dysregulation may lead to hydrocephalus.
Our findings further reveal that activated Akt and STAT3 pathways induce the upregulation of HIF1Alfa and its downstream targets (LDHA and PDK1), leading to increased glycolysis in myeloma cells.
We show the unprecedented role of the metabolic phenotype in inducing drug resistance through LDHA and HIF1A in multiple myeloma, and that specific inhibition of LDHA and HIF1A can restore sensitivity to therapeutic agents such as bortezomib and can also inhibit tumor growth induced by altered metabolism.
Novel drugs that regulate metabolic pathways in multiple myeloma, specifically targeting LDHA, can be beneficial to inhibit tumor growth and overcome drug resistance.
A 36,000-Mr protein purified from mouse myeloma on the basis of selective binding to a single-stranded DNA (ssDNA)-cellulose column has been identified as the lactate dehydrogenase A (LDH-A) subunit.
A homogeneous preparation of this mouse myeloma ssDNA-binding protein, termed the 'low-salt-eluting protein', was found to possess LDH activity, and rabbit antiserum prepared against this protein was shown to cross-react with purified 36,000-Mr LDH-A subunits from mouse and bovine sources.
These enzymic and immunological identities with LDH-A were not observed with purified helix-destabilizing protein 1 from mouse myeloma.
Concentrations of total lactate dehydrogenase (LDH; EC 1.1.1.27) and LDH isoenzyme patterns were studied in serum of 19 patients with multiple myeloma and in 19 healthy controls.
Defective DNA repair is tightly correlated with worse neurological outcomes after stroke, whereas upregulation of DNA repair enzymes, such as APE1, OGG1, and XRCC1, improves long-term functional recovery following stroke.
Our data showed that OGG1 Ser326Cys and XRCC1 Arg399Gln gene polymorphisms had impacts on the development of stroke.
Previously, our laboratory showed that mice lacking the BER glycosylases 8-oxoguanine glycosylase 1 (Ogg1) or nei endonuclease VIII-like 1 (Neil1) recover more poorly from focal ischemic stroke than wild-type mice.
Genotyping of polymorphisms of the OGG1 (Ser326Cys), XRCC1 (Arg399Gln), ERCC2 (Lys751Gln), and ERCC5 (Asp1104His) genes was performed and used to evaluate LAA stroke susceptibility.
A joint effect on risk elevation of LAA stroke was seen in those patients with OGG1 and ERCC2 polymorphisms (OR: 2.75, 95%CI: 1.26-6.00).
Moreover, among smokers carrying the OGG1 Ser326Cys polymorphism, there was a tendency toward an increased risk of LAA stroke in those patients who had a greater number of high-risk genotypes of XRCC1, ERCC2, and ERCC5 polymorphisms (p(trend)=0.010).
Among 22 patients who underwent LP shunt placement for IIH, 16 (72.8%) patients had severe and fulminant opening CSF pressures with values of more than 400 mmH(2)O.
This study implicates increased I(NaL) in excessive atrial APD prolongation and arrhythmic EAD occurrence in a congenital LQTS3 mouse model.
(1) To report the different patterns of NAL and discuss the mechanisms encountered; (2) to determine the relationship between a given type of lymphoma and a specific type of neuropathy; and (3) to assess the prognosis of NAL.
Two thousand four hundred ninety-three consecutive dermatitis patients in 9 dermatology clinics were patch tested with a TDM 6.6%, consisting of Disperse (D) Blue 35, D Yellow 3, D Orange 1 and 3, D Red 1 and 17, all 1.0% each, and D Blue 106 and D Blue 124, each 0.3%.
The name hydrolethalus refers to the main findings, namely polyhydramnios, hydrocephalus and lethality.
VACTERL with hydrocephalus appears distinct from hydrolethalus and similar conditions but is itself heterogeneous.
In this study, we evaluated the feasibility of combining p53-DC vaccine and rAd-p53 gene therapy, using the p53-overexpressing and non-expressing prostate cancer cells in vitro.
In addition, rAd-p53 infection can induce overexpression of p53 and thus the cytotoxicity of CTLs differentiated by the p53-DC vaccine in p53 non-expressing prostate cancer cells.
This study detected the migration of MSCs to high metastasis liver carcinoma cells MHCC-97H in vitro, investigated the inhibitory effect of rAd-NK4-MSCs on the growth and metastasis of MHCC-97H cells, further explored the inhibitory mechanism of rAd-NK4-MSCs to MHCC-97H cell metastasis, and examined the inhibitory effect of rAd-NK4-MSCs on the migration of human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) in vitro.
The present study was conducted to identify the anti-tumor effects of rAd/p53, which is a recombinant human serotype 5 adenovirus, in cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (cSCC).
Finally, the mechanistic experiments indicate that DUXAP10 could interact with Histone demethylase Lysine specific demethylase1 (LSD1) and repress tumor suppressors Large tumor suppressor 2 (LATS2) and Ras-related associated with diabetes (RRAD) transcription in NSCLC cells.
To compare clinical curative effects and toxicity of recombinant human adenovirus-p53 injection (rAd-p53, Gendicine) combining chemoradiotherapy (CRT)/radiotherapy (RT) with those obtained with CRT/RT alone in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC).
We used data generated from a haploid hydatidiform mole genome (CHM1) and a diploid human genome (NA12878) to test our approach.
Our results show the recovery of an allele of the non-coding minisatellite MS1 (located on chromosome 1 at 1p33-35) at greater than 97% identity to reference (GRCh38) from the unprocessed sequence data of a haploid complete hydatidiform mole (CHM1) cell line.
We demonstrate the utility of Alpha-CENTAURI in characterizing repeat structure for alpha satellite containing reads in the hydatidiform mole (CHM1, haploid-like) genome.
In order to overcome the issue of allelic diversity, we used genomic DNA from an essentially haploid hydatidiform mole, CHM1.
Consistent with these findings, we observed that in an IL-33-administered asthmatic airway inflammation model, IL-13 levels were markedly increased in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, but its levels were markedly suppressed by treatment with inhibitors of 5-LO, 12-LO or BLT2, further suggesting roles of 5-/12-LO in IL-33-induced IL-13 production.
Our results suggest that "MyD88-5-/12-LO-BLT2-NF-KB" cascade significantly contributes to the IL-33-induced synthesis of IL-13 in mast cells, thus potentially contributing to asthmatic development and exacerbation.
DNA methylation changes at a number of these genes have been linked to various forms of human disease, including cancers, such as asthma and acute myeloid leukemia (ALOX12), gastric cancer (EBF3), breast cancer (NAV1), colon cancer and acute lymphoid leukemia (KCNK15), Wilms tumor (protocadherin gene cluster; PCDHAs) and colorectal cancer (TCERG1L), suggesting a potential etiologic role for MEs in tumorigenesis and underscoring the possible developmental origins of these malignancies.
DNA methylation of ALOX12 may be an epigenetic biomarker for the risk of asthma-related phenotypes.
We provide evidence that MJD in five pedigrees of Azorean descent is also linked to chromosome 14q in an 18-cM region between the markers D14S67 and AACT (multipoint lod score +7.00 near D14S81).
Here we report linkage disequilibrium of rs2288904 with rs3087969 and the association of these SLC44A2 SNPs with Meniere's disease severity.
The association of SLC44A2 SNPs with VTE suggests that thrombi affecting cochlear vessels could be a factor in Meniere's disease.
The present study deals with CTLA-4 gene selected polymorphisms (rs11571317 C/T and rs3087243G/A) to explore their relation with breast cancer susceptibility and progression in BC patients.
Clinical experience with checkpoint inhibitors in hepatocellular carcinoma includes early trials with the anti-CTLA-4 agent tremelimumab, and a large phase 2 trial with the anti-PD-1 agent nivolumab.
Several immune checkpoint inhibitors that target programmed cell death protein 1 (PD1), its ligand PDL1, and cytotoxic T lymphocyte-associated protein 4 (CTLA4) have already been approved for use in bladder cancer, representing the most important change to the urological oncologist's tool-kit in over a decade.
Our model predicts survival in anti-CTLA-4-treated patients with melanoma and anti-PD-1-treated patients with lung cancer.
Small animal PET/CT studies showed that 89Zr-C4 detected antigen levels on a patient derived xenograft (PDX) established from a non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patient before an 8-month response to anti-PD-1 and anti-CTLA4 therapy.
Autosomal disorders such as mutations of the phosphomannomutase 2 (PMM2) gene, the galactose-1-phosphate uridyltransferase (GALT) gene, the FSH receptor (FSHR) gene, chromosome 3q containing the Blepharophimosis gene and the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene, responsible for polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy, have been identified in patients with POF.
Osteoclast-specific genes such as Trap, osteopetrosis-associated transmembrane protein 1 (Ostm1), chloride channel 7 (Clcn7), cathepsin K (Ctsk) as well as osteoclast-specific transcription factor and microphthalmia transcription factor (MITF) were up-regulated in the treated cells, whilst the messenger RNA (mRNA) levels of Dspp, Dmp1 and Opg were reduced in the induced cells.
Cathepsin K is a protease whose expression is driven by microphthalmia transcription factor (MITF) in osteoclasts.
Among cell species that infiltrated in perichondral granulation, LCA, CD68 (monocytes/macrophages), and CD4 cells were dominant in number; MMP-8, MMP-9, and elastase were expressed only in the perichondral granulation; whereas MMP-3 and cathepsin K and L were detected in both chondrocytes and granulations.
Overexpression of microphthalmia transcription factor has been shown to mediate the expression of cathepsin-K in osteoclasts.
We studied cathepsin-K in 17 cytogenetically confirmed microphthalmia transcription factor/TFE-family translocation renal cell carcinomas.
Radiographs of the hands of 60 patients with cartilage hair hypoplasia (CHH), 69 with trichorhinophalangeal syndrome I (TRP I) and 11 with TRP II were examined, including 26 longitudinal observations.
We report here the new approach of fusing putidaredoxin reductase (PdR) to the carboxy-terminus of CYP101A1 (P450cam) via a linker peptide and reconstituting camphor hydroxylase activity with free putidaredoxin (Pdx).
For other diseases, a well-established example relates to CYP1B1 where homozygosity for rare mutations occurs in primary congenital glaucoma.
Rare CYP1B1 mutations and possibly polymorphisms may also contribute to risk for more common forms of glaucoma.
However, the effects of the potential herb-drug interactions (HDIs) between LCA and therapeutic drugs on the inhibition of human cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes remain unclear.
In the present study, the inhibitory effects of LCA on seven major human CYP isoforms, including CYP1A2, 2D6, 2E1, 2C19, 2C8, 2C9 and 3A4, were investigated in human liver microsomes (HLMs).
The results demonstrated that LCA significantly inhibited the activities of CYP1A2, 2C19, 2C8, 2C9 and 3A4 and exhibited weak inhibitory effects on CYP2E1 and CYP2D6.
Dixon and Lineweaver-Burk plots revealed that the inhibition types of LCA against CYP1A2, 2C9, 2C19 and 2C8 were best fit as mixed-type inhibitions, while LCA was a competitive inhibitor towards CYP3A4.
Furthermore, the areas under the plasma concentration-time curves (AUCs) of several drugs that are primarily metabolized by CYPs were estimated to increase by 2-398% in the presence of LCA, which suggested that LCA exhibited high HDI potentials via CYP inhibition.
To evaluate safety and efficacy of intravenous pulse cyclophosphamide (CyP) in acute macular serpiginous choroiditis (SC).
Diabetes significantly changed the kidney expression of Rage, Sod2, Tgfb1 and Ctgf, Pdp2, nephrin, and Lias.
The main findings were 1) obesity resulted in a 46% decrease in PDP activity expressed per milligram extracted mitochondrial protein only in RG, while PDP isoform content was unchanged; 2) 8 wk of endurance training led to a significant 1.4-2.2-fold increase in PDP activity of all muscle examined from obese rats, and the concomitant increase in PDP1 protein was only seen in soleus and RG; 3) 8 wk of endurance training led to a trending 1.4-2.2-fold increase in PDP activity of all muscle examined from obese rats, and the concomitant increase in PDP1 protein was only seen in soleus and RG; and 4) PDP2 protein content was not affected by obesity or training.
Starvation and streptozotocin-induced diabetes cause decreases in PDP2 mRNA abundance, PDP2 protein amount, and PDP activity in rat heart and kidney.
This study analyzed protein expression and DNA alterations for the KRAS, CDKN2A, SMAD4, and TP53 genes by immunohistochemistry and next-generation sequencing in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tumors in 356 patients with resected pancreatic adenocarcinoma who were treated at the Dana-Farber/Brigham and Women's Cancer Center (October 26, 2002, to May 21, 2012), University of Rochester Medical Center (March 1, 2006, to November 1, 2013), or Stanford Cancer Institute (September 26, 1995, to May 22, 2013).
We established a genetic diagnosis in six families with autosomal recessive HSP (SPG11 in three families and TFG/SPG57, SACS and ALS2 in one family each).
We are now performing molecular testing of the HSP patients using Sanger sequencing (SPG4, SPG11, SPG31, and ARSACS), comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) array (SPG1, 2, 3A, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 13, 15, 17, 20, 21, 31, 33, 39, 42, ABCD1, alsin, and ARSACS), and resequencing microarray (SPG1, 2, 3A, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 13, 17, 20, 21, 31, 33, and ABCD1).
Meanwhile, preliminary data showed that SPG11 and ARSACS were common in Japanese ARHSP families.
We are now performing molecular testing for the HSP patients using direct sequencing (SPG4, SPG31, and ARSACS), comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) array (SPG1/2/3A/4/5/6/7/8/10/11/13/15/17/20/21/31/33/39/42/ABCD1/alsin/SACS), and resequencing microarray (SPG1/2/3A/4/5/6/7/8/10/11/13/17/20/21/31/33/ABCD1).
Meanwhile, preliminary data showed that SPG11 and ARSACS were common in Japanese ARHSP families.
Autosomal recessive spastic ataxia of Charlevoix-Saguenay is an early onset form of hereditary spastic paraplegia with a peculiar clinical presentation.
On the basis of our data, we therefore suggest that social avoidance (expressed as social phobia or avoidant personality disorder) has been underestimated in previous studies of carriers with the FMR-1 full mutation or premutation.
Analysis of GenBank-derived clones on the Y chromosome revealed the presence of two full-length copies in azoospermia factor region b (AZFb) (PRY1 and PRY2) and two shorter versions of the PRY gene containing exons 3, 4 and 5 in AZFc (PRY3 and PRY4).
PRY1 and PRY2, two gene copies that are located in AZFb, a region often deleted in patients with severe male infertility, were shown to be expressed in the testis.
Expression of KIR3DL2 on NK and T cells was quantified in peripheral blood (PB) from 35 patients with SpA and 5 patients with juvenile enthesitis-related arthritis (juvenile ERA); samples were compared with samples from healthy and rheumatoid arthritis (RA) controls.
NKB1 inhibits cytoxic activity of T lymphocytes mediated by superantigens, which is one of the contributing factors in the pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
Killer Ig-like receptors (KIRs) are expressed on CD4(+)CD28(null) T cells, a highly oligoclonal subset of T cells that is expanded in patients with rheumatoid arthritis.
Functional involvement of NKAIN2 in miR-181d-regulated pancreatic cancer development was tested by small interfering RNA-mediated NKAIN2 knockdown in miR-181d-downregulated PANC-1 and AsPC-1 cells.
NKAIN2 was directly targeted by miR-181d in pancreatic cancer.
Small interfering RNA-mediated NKAIN2 knockdown reversed the inhibition of miR-181d downregulation on pancreatic cancer development.
Inhibiting miR-181d may suppress pancreatic cancer development, possibly through the inverse regulation on NKAIN2.
Recurrent chromosome breakpoints at 6q22.31, leading to truncation and potential loss-of-function of the NKAIN2 gene, in Chinese prostate cancer patients were previously identified.
In this study we investigated genomic, methylation and expression changes of NKAIN2 in a large number of prostate cancer samples and determined its functional role in prostate cancer cells.
Fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis confirmed that NKAIN2 truncation is specific to Chinese while deletion of the gene is frequent in both Chinese and UK prostate cancers.
Somatic mutations of NKAIN2 in prostate cancer samples exist but at very low frequency, suggesting that it is a putative tumor suppressor gene (TSG) with haploid insufficiency.
Our functional studies showed that overexpression of NKAIN2 in prostate cancer cells inhibits cellular growth by promoting cell apoptosis, and decreasing cell migration and invasion.
Conversely, knockdown of NKAIN2 promotes prostate cancer cell growth by inhibiting cell apoptosis, and increasing cell migration and invasion.
These data imply that NKAIN2 is a novel TSG whose activity is commonly reduced in prostate cancer.
Our recent work detected recurrent chromosomal truncation at the Na(+)/K(+) transporting ATPase interacting 2 (NKAIN2) gene in prostate cancer, which was also found to be truncated in leukemia and lymphoma, suggesting that NKAIN2 is potentially one of the TSGs located in the 6q commonly deleted region in human cancers.
Fluorescent in situ hybridisation with BAC/PAC clones and long range polymerase chain reaction products assessed in the human genome sequence localised the chromosome 1 breakpoint to a 9.8 kb segment within a hypothetical gene, LOC388735, and the chromosome 6 breakpoint to a 12.8 kb segment in intron 4 of the T-cell lymphoma breakpoint-associated target 1 (TCBA1) gene.
Disruption and/or formation of TCBA1 fusion genes in T cell lymphoma and leukaemia cell lines suggests a role for this gene in tumorigenesis.
We identified two T-cell lymphoma/leukemia cell lines with different differentiation stages that had breakpoints within the same novel gene, TCBA1 (T-cell lymphoma breakpoint associated target 1).
In a T-cell lymphoblastic lymphoma cell line, HT-1, the TCBA1 fused to SUSP1 (SUMO-1-specific protease), creating a SUSP1-TCBA1 chimeric gene.
However, in an adult T-cell leukemia cell line, ATN-1, no chimeric gene was detected, although aberrant TCBA1 transcripts were produced.
The expression levels of TUG1 were determined using Real-Time qPCR in a total of 44 patients with bladder urothelial carcinomas.
Bladder urothelial carcinoma T24 and 5637 cells were transfected with TUG1 siRNA or negative control siRNA.
TUG1 was up-regulated in bladder urothelial carcinoma compared to paired normal urothelium.
Cell proliferation inhibition and apoptosis induction were observed in TUG1 siRNA-transfected bladder urothelial carcinoma T24 and 5637 cells.
Our data suggest that lincRNA TUG1 is emerging as a novel player in the disease state of bladder urothelial carcinoma.
TUG1 may have potential roles as a biomarker and/or a therapeutic target in bladder urothelial carcinoma.
Serial samples of serum Cystatin C and urine NGAL were collected from 139 consecutive patients with congenital heart defects aged 3 days to 30 years after admission to the intensive care unit, 2 and 6 hours after the end of cardiopulmonary bypass.
Hyper-IgE syndrome (HIES) is a very rare primary immune deficiency characterized by elevated serum IgE levels, recurrent bacterial infections, chronic dermatitis, and connective tissue abnormalities.
We describe the clinical course of a 2-month-old infant who was evaluated for autosomal dominant Hyper IgE Syndrome based on eczema, periorbital cellulitis, skin abscesses, increased total IgE levels and blood eosinophilia.
IL-22 induces STAT3 phosphorylation and mediates psoriasis-related gene expression.
The IL-22-STAT3-Bcl-3 pathway may be important in the pathogenesis of psoriasis.
By using quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction, we identified significant upregulation of PMEPA1 gene expression in malignant tissues of patients with gastric adenocarcinoma.
By using developed antibodies, we observed pronounced expression of TMEPAI in normal gastric epithelial cells while tumor cells from gastric adenomas, and adenocarcinoma samples were mostly negative for target protein expression.
Analysis of expressed sequence tag databases showed that STAG1/PMEPA1 also was expressed in pancreatic, endometrial, and prostatic adenocarcinomas.
It is concluded that co-exposure to PM2.5 and FA exacerbated allergic asthma through oxidative stress and enhanced TRPV1 activation.
Our data suggests the involvement of TRPV1 in allergic asthma and thus we feel this target merits further investigation.
TNFAlfa, a proinflammatory cytokine known to be involved in the pathogenesis of allergic asthma, has been shown to induce hyperalgesia in somatic tissue via a sensitizing effect on dorsal root ganglion neurons expressing transient receptor potential vanilloid type 1 receptor (TRPV1).
Sequencing of genes known to be causative for WS [microphthalmia transcription factor (MITF), Pax3, Sox10, SNAI2 ] failed to show any candidate mutations to explain this complex cutaneous depigmentation phenotype.
The mice include splotch (Sp), microphthalmia (mi), Slugh-/-, WS4, JF1, lethal-spotting (ls), and Dominant megacolon (Dom).
The effect of ELL3 depletion on cell morphology, latent Epstein Barr Virus (EBV) lytic replication and differentiation markers in a Burkitt's lymphoma (BL) cell line cells are presented.
Burkitt's lymphoma and a sub-set of Diffuse Large B cell lymphoma cell lines abundantly express ELL3.
This article provides a comprehensive review of the syndromes and disorders associated with NTDs, including Pallister-Hall syndrome, Walker-Warburg syndrome and Fukuyama congenital muscular dystrophy, MURCS association, Roberts syndrome, cerebro-costo-mandibular syndrome, laterality sequences, hydrolethalus syndrome, Knobloch syndrome, oculoauriculovertebral spectrum (hemifacial microsomia), cervico-oculo-acoustic syndrome, Fanconi anemia, Miller-Dieker lissencephaly syndrome, Fraser syndrome, frontonasal dysplasia, Adams-Oliver syndrome, CHILD syndrome, dyssegmental dysplasia, and monozygotic twinning.
Moreover, the Etv5 mutation resulted in several developmental abnormalities including an increased incidence of embryonic and perinatal lethality, postnatal growth restriction, polydactyly and renal asymmetry.
Here, we show that conditional knockout of the FGF-activated transcription factor genes Etv4 and Etv5 in mouse led to ectopic Shh expression in the anterior limb bud and a preaxial polydactyly (PPD) skeletal phenotype.
Mechanistic studies showed that inducible expression of CD82 in highly metastatic melanoma cells significantly increased p21 expression upon binding of Duffy antigen receptor group (DARC), inducing tumor cell senescence and interrupting IL-8-mediated vascular endothelial (VE)-cadherin disassembly.
Our oneway ANOVA analysis results showed that in all cases from benign diseases to invasive carcinoma, the concentration of CXCL8, CXCR4 and CXCL12 was significantly different; in benign subgroups (benign change, benign change with proliferation, atypia), the concentration of CCL2 and CCR5 was significantly different; in invasive carcinoma cases, DARC concentration was significantly correlated with the relapse risk of patients.
177Lu-DOTATATE = lutetium octreotate; ACO = aconitase; Ad = adenine; AD = autosomal dominant; ATRX = ATRX chromatin remodeler; ccRCC = clear cell renal cell carcinoma; c-MYC = MYC proto oncognene; CoA = coenzyme A; COMT = catechol-O-methyl transferase; CPE = carboxypeptidase E; CS = citrate synthase; CT = computed tomography; DH = pyruvate dehydrogenase; DOTATATE = DOTA-octreotate; EGLN1/2 = egl-9 family hypoxia inducible factor 1/2; EGLN2/PHD1 = egl-9 family hypoxia inducible factor 2; elF-4E = eukaryotic initiation factor 4E; EMT = epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition; EPAS1/HIF2A = endothelial PAS domain protein 2/hypoxia-inducible factor 2Alfa; ERK = extracellular signal-regulated kinase; FH = fumarate hydroxylase; GSH = glutathione; H3F3A = histone 3.3 encoding gene; HIFs = Hypoxia-inducible factors; HIF-Alfa = hypoxia-inducible factor alpha; HNPGLs = head and neck paragangliomas; HRAS = HRas protooncogene; IDH = isocitrate dehydrogenase; IGF-1R = growth factor 1 receptor; KIF1B = kinesin family member 1B; MAX = myc-associated factor X; MDH2 = malate dehydrogenase; MN = metanephrine; MRI = magnetic resonance imaging; mTORC1 = mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1; MTY = methoxytyramine; NAd = nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide; NETs = neuroendocrine tumors; NF1 = neurofibromin 1; NMN = normetanephrine; OPLS-DA = orthogonal partial least square discriminant analysis; PFS = progression free survival; PHD = prolyl hydroxylase domain protein; PPGLs = Pheochromocytoma and Paragangliomas; PRRT = peptide receptor radionuclide therapy; Pvhl = von Hippel-Lindau protein; Raptor = regulatory associated protein of mTOR; RAS = rat sarcoma oncogene; RET = rearranged during transfection proto-oncogene; ROS = reactive oxygen species; S6K = S6 kinase; SDH = succinate dehydrogenase; SDHA, -B, -C, -D, = succinate dehydrogenase subunits A, B, C, D; SDHAF2 = succinate dehydrogenase complex assembly factor 2; SDHB, C, D = succinate dehydrogenase subunits B, C, D; SDHx = succinate dehydrogenase subunits; SSTRs = somatostatin receptors; SUCLG = succinyl-CoA synthase; TERRA = Telomeric Repeat-containing RNA; TET = ten-eleven-translocation methylcytosine dioxygenase; TMEM127 = transmembrane protein 127; VEGF = vascular endothelial growth factor; VHL = von Hippel-Lindau; Alfa-KGDH = alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase.
Immunohistochemistry for phosphorylated-S6, phosphorylated-mTOR, mTOR, phosphorylated-AKT, hypoxia inducible factor-1Alfa, Raptor, phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN), phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K), and phosphorylated 4E-binding protein-1 was performed on tissue microarray constructs of patients treated for nonmetastatic kidney cancer from 1997 to 2010.
Cholangiocarcinoma is a disease entity comprising diverse epithelial tumours with features of cholangiocyte differentiation: cholangiocarcinomas are categorized according to anatomical location as intrahepatic (iCCA), perihilar (pCCA), or distal (dCCA).
Cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) represents a diverse group of epithelial cancers associated with the biliary tract, and can best be stratified anatomically into intrahepatic (iCCA), perihilar (pCCA) and distal (dCCA) subsets.
Preoperative evaluation of vasculobiliary anatomy in the umbilical fissure (U-point) is pivotal for perihilar cholangiocarcinoma (PCCA) applied to right-sided hepatectomy.
This study sought to define the role of adjuvant radiation therapy (RT) for patients with curative intent resection of perihilar cholangiocarcinoma (pCCA).
Our goal was to characterize PD-L1 expression in intra-hepatic (iCCA) and perihilar (pCCA) cholangiocarcinomas, and to correlate our results with clinicopathological features, density of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) and PD-1 expression.A series of 58 iCCAs and 41 pCCAs was included in the study.
Liver transplantation (LT) provides a good chance of cure for selected patients with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and perihilar cholangiocarcinoma (pCCA).
BTC are sub-classified as intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (iCCA), perhilar/hilar cholangiocarcinoma (pCCA), distal cholangiocarcinoma (dCCA), and gallbladder carcinoma.
To evaluate prognostic factors for stent patency and survival in patients with perihilar cholangiocarcinoma (pCCA) who underwent percutaneous biliary stent placement.
Clinical data were collected and analyzed from 71 cases of primary nephrotic syndrome with glucocorticoid-induced ocular hypertension, glaucoma or cataract from Jun.
c-Jun, c-Jun N-terminal kinase(JNK) and endothelin B (ETB) receptor have been shown to contribute to the pathogenesis of glaucoma.
Ocular hypertension also caused upregulations in the iron-regulating protein ceruloplasmin, the anaerobic glycolytic enzyme lactate dehydrogenase, and the transcription factors cFos and p-cJun.
JUN is expressed after glaucoma-relevant injuries and Jun deficiency protects RGCs after mechanical injury to the optic nerve.
Here, we tested the importance of JNK-JUN signaling for RGC death after ocular hypertensive axonal injury in an age-related, mouse model of ocular hypertension.
JUN was expressed in a temporal and spatial pattern consistent with a role in glaucomatous injury.
To determine the importance of JUN in ocular hypertension-induced RGC death, a floxed allele of Jun and a retinal expressed cre recombinase (Six3-cre) were backcrossed onto the DBA/2J background.
Jun deficiency protected RGC somas from ocular hypertensive injury, but did not protect RGC axons from glaucomatous neurodegeneration.
Jun is a major regulator of RGC somal degeneration after glaucomatous ocular hypertensive injury.
These results suggest in glaucomatous neurodegeneration, JNK-JUN signaling has a major role as a pro-death signaling pathway between axonal injury and somal degeneration.
To our knowledge the co-existence of Pompe disease and thymic neuroendocrine tumor in the same patient has not been previously reported.
Significantly more A-C (block 2: rs230528-rs230521) haplotypes (P = 0.0003 after Bonferroni's corrections) and G-A-A (block 4: rs4648068-rs3774964-rs3774968) haplotypes (P = 0.021) were found in the patients with ovarian cancer.
The thyroid conditions for which surgery was indicated were: diffuse toxic goiter in 8 patients; multinodular toxic and nontoxic goiter in 30 patients; autonomous nodule in 2 patients; 2 patients with benign nodules at fine needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB); 4 patients with nodules positive for carcinoma at FNAB, among them 2 with unilateral cervical lymph nodes enlargement; 4 patients with highly suspect nodule on FNAB.
The aim of the present study was to comparatively investigate the effects of piroxicam, a selective COX-I inhibitor, and celecoxib, a selective COX-II inhibitor, on cognitive functions in an AlCl3-induced neurotoxicity mouse model to understand the specific role of each COX enzyme in the hippocampus and cortex.
Of these differentially expressed genes, we elected to further examine the increase in COX1 expression, because of data implicating energy utilization in METH neurotoxicity and the known role of COX1 in energy metabolism.
The precise role of COX1 and other genes in METH neurotoxicity remains to be elucidated.
Various genes involved in the control of cell proliferation and invasion (p16INK4A, RASSF1A, PTEN, Rap1GAP, TIMP3, DAPK, RARBeta2, E-cadherin, and CITED1) as well as genes specific of thyroid differentiation (Na+/I- symport, TSH receptor, pendrin, SL5A8, and TTF-1) present aberrant methylation in thyroid cancer.
Immunohistochemistry was performed using primary antibodies to cytokeratin 19, HBME1, and CITED1 that have been found to be useful in the diagnosis of thyroid carcinoma.
Markers such as HBME-1 and CITED1 can assist in separating some difficult cases of follicular variants of papillary thyroid carcinomas from follicular adenomas.
These analyses showed that several antibodies were useful in distinguishing follicular adenomas from follicular variant of papillary thyroid carcinomas including HBME-1, CITED1, galectin-3, cytokeratin 19, and S100A4 (p &lt; 0.0001).
A combination of markers consisting of a panel of HBME-1, galectin-3, and CK19 or a panel of HBME-1, CITED1, and galectin-3 was usually most effective in distinguishing follicular adenoma from follicular variant of papillary thyroid carcinoma.
We examined acetylcholinesterase, plasma neuronal proteins, secreted beta-amyloid precursor protein (APP), and amyloid-beta 40 and amyloid-beta 42 peptides in children with and without autism.
The growth associated protein 43-positive fibres also seemed to be less in six samples of club foot.
Here we showed that miR-342-5p and miR-608 suppressed the tumorigenesis of colon cancer cells in vitro and in vivo by targeting NAA10 mRNA for degradation.
Our results implicate miR-342-5p and miR-608 in colon cancer development and unveil the underlying mechanism of this phenomenon, which involves NAA10.
We demonstrated the clinical relevance of the miRNAs and identified miR-342-5p and miR-744* as significantly down-regulated in HER2-positive breast tumors as compared to HER2-negative tumors from two cohorts of breast cancer patients (101 and 1302 cases).
Furthermore, higher expression of miR-342-5p was associated with better survival in both breast cancer patient cohorts.
Compromised CN function is a significant cause of erectile dysfunction development following prostatectomy and serves as the primary target for potential neuroprotective or regenerative strategies utilizing NGFs such as BDNF, GDF-5, and NTN, and/or targeted novel therapeutics modulating signaling pathways.
The manifestation of LHON was associated with increased mortality and increased incidence of several disorders including stroke, demyelinating disorder, dementia, and epilepsy.
Leber's Hereditary Optic Neuropathy (LHON) shares features with Multiple Sclerosis (MS).
Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON) is a mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) associated neurodegenerative disorder of retinal ganglion cells.
MT-ND4: mitochondrially encoded NADH dehydrogenase 4; MT-TL1: mitochondrially encoded tRNA leucine 1 (UUA/G); PCR: polymerase chain reaction; OXPHOS: mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation; ATP: adenosine triphosphate; mtDNA: mitochondrial DNA; SNPs: single nucleotide substitutions; AD: alzheimer's disease; PD: parkinson's disease; MELAS: mitochondrial encephalomyopathy with lactic acidosis and stroke-like episodes; ROS: reactive oxygen species.
Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON) co-occuring with multiple sclerosis-like disease (LHON-MS) is suggested to be a separate disease entity denoted Harding's disease.
The role of oxidative stress in the five most common inherited mitochondrial diseases, Friedreich ataxia, LHON, MELAS, MERRF, and Leigh syndrome (LS), is discussed.
Of the five most common mitochondrial diseases, the strongest support for oxidative stress is for Friedreich ataxia (6.42%), followed by LHON (2.45%), MELAS (2.18%), MERRF (1.71%), and LS (1.03%).
Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON) and a multiple sclerosis (MS)-like illness appear to coexist 50 times more frequently than would be expected by chance.
Mutations in the retinitis pigmentosa 1 (RP1) gene are a common cause of retinitis pigmentosa (RP).
Furthermore, these findings indicate that the RP1 form of inherited retinal degeneration is part of the larger class of neurodegenerative diseases caused by MAP dysfunction.
Our objective was to determine the ethical options of Paediatric Intensive Care Unit (PICU) paediatricians as regards a child with SMA-1 and respiratory failure.
Faced with child with SMA-1 and respiratory failure, most paediatricians are in favour of initiating NIV and LET when such support is insufficient, but they would accept the family's decision, even in case of disagreement.
A scenario of acute respiratory failure in an infant with SMA-1 has been included in a training program using advanced simulation for Primary Care pediatricians (PCP).
When faced with a simulated SMA-1 infant with respiratory failure, PCP have difficulties in interacting with the family, and to involve it in the decision making process.
TREX1 acts in concert with the SET complex in granzyme A-mediated apoptosis, and mutations in TREX1 cause Aicardi-Goutieres syndrome and familial chilblain lupus.
Lymphoblastoid cells carrying the D18N mutation are significantly less sensitive to granzyme A-mediated cell death, suggesting a novel role for this caspase-independent form of apoptosis in the pathogenesis of familial chilblain lupus.
A recent article explored protective modifiers, including plastin 3 (PLS3) and coronin 1C (CORO1C), in spinal muscular atrophy (SMA).
However, the expression of CYP26C1, another CYP26 family member, in primary breast carcinoma remains to be clarified.
In the present study, we examined the expression of CYP26C1 by immunohistochemistry, using three different types of microarray, and observed strong cytoplasmic staining of CYP26C1 in 73 of the 219 (33.3 %) breast carcinomas.
In addition, CYP26C1 positivity was independent of the expression status of the hormone receptors and immunohistochemical surrogates for the intrinsic subtypes of breast cancer.
This report is the first to demonstrate elevated expression of CYP26C1 in primary breast carcinomas.
In the present study we chose to investigate 7 genes involved in the synthesis, degradation and transportation of RA, ALDH1A1, ALDH1A2, ALDH1A3, CYP26A1, CYP26B1, CYP26C1 and Transthyretin (TTR), for their roles in the development of schizophrenia.
The index of low SIRT1 and high MMP2 respectively correlated with patients history of MI (p=0.3, p=0.01) and marginally with presence or history of atrial fibrillation (AF) (p=0.213, p=0.076).
BACKGROUND To examine changes of mRNA and protein expressions of MMP-2, Bcl-2, and BAX in atrial fibrillation (AF) patients, and investigate the correlations among these 3 biomarkers.
In conclusion, disruption of Kcnj16 induces a severe renal phenotype that, apart from hypokalemia, is the opposite of the phenotype seen in SeSAME/EAST syndrome.
We investigated the localization of KCNJ10 and the homologous KCNJ16 in kidney and the functional consequences of KCNJ10 mutations found in our patients with EAST syndrome.
Toxin C13S1C1 was also cytotoxic against breast adenocarcinoma MDA-MB-231 cells (LC50 = 62+/-2myg/ml) and colorectal adenocarcinoma HT-29 cells (LC50 = 110+/-4myg/ml).
We report an unusual case of invasive papillary carcinoma of the breast with high nuclear grade, brisk mitosis, necrosis, extensive apocrine differentiation, and intense lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate; additionally triple-negativity for estrogen and progesterone receptors and Her2 neu.
Moreover, Sec24bY613 genetically interacts with a loss-of-function Vangl2 allele (Vangl2LP), causing a marked increase in the prevalence of spina bifida.
The overall goal of TASK2 of the AES/ILAE Translational Task Force is to organize and coordinate systematic reviews on selected topics regarding animal research in epilepsy.
K2P 5.1 channels (also called TASK-2 or Kcnk5) have already been shown to be relevant in the pathophysiology of autoimmune disease because they are known to be upregulated on peripheral and central T lymphocytes of multiple sclerosis (MS) patients.
Recent studies have indicated the impact of K2P5.1 upregulation in T lymphocytes on the pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis and multiple sclerosis.
So far KCNK5 has been described to be up-regulated in T cells in multiple sclerosis patients and to be implicated in the volume regulatory mechanism regulatory volume decrease (RVD) in T cells.
Recent studies highlighted the potential role of the K2P5.1 K(+) channel in the pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis and multiple sclerosis.
Expression levels of K2P5.1 (TASK2; KCNK5) channels belonging to the family of two-pore domain potassium channels have previously been correlated to the activity of autoreactive T lymphocytes in patients with multiple sclerosis and rheumatoid arthritis.
Thus, we evaluated the effect of serum availability on the expression of commonly used HKG (ACTB, B2M, GAPDH, GUSB, HPRT1, IPO8, MRPL19, PGK1, PPIA, RPLP0, RPS23, SDHA, TBP, UBC, and YWHAZ) in seven colon adenocarcinoma cell lines (Caco-2, DLD-1, HCT116, HT29, Lovo, SW480, and SW620).
We investigated whether the expression of PGK1 varies between metastatic and non-metastatic colon cancer.
We compared PGK1 expression in colon cancer patients either with or without metastasis via polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and immunohistochemistry.
PCR results showed an increased expression of PGK1 in colon cancer tissue from metastatic patients in comparison to patients with no metastasis (fold change 2.6, p&lt;0.001).
The results indicate that increased expression of PGK1 in colon cancer tissue is associated with metastasis.
TYMS and PGK1, as well as their epitope peptides, might be appropriate target molecules for specific immunotherapy of HLA-A2(+) colon cancer patients because of the positive role of TYMS and PGK1 in chemoresistance (5-fluorouracil) and angiogenesis of tumor cells, respectively.
In one sample we sequenced 7231 contiguous base pairs that covered completely the region from the 5'end of the 16S rRNA gene to the 5'end of the 23S rRNA gene comprising the whole 16S rRNA (rrs), and the following genes: Ala tRNA (alaT), Ile tRNA (ileT), adenylosuccinate lyase (purB), adenylosuccinate synthetase (purA), methylpurine-DNA glycosylase (mag), hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase (hpt), an hydrolase (HAD superfamily) and a 135 bp 5' fragment of the 23S rRNA (rrlA) genes.
Additionally, NOLC1 expression was decreased in human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) tissue, and the ectopic expression of NOLC1 repressed the proliferation of HCC cells and tumor growth in a HCC xenograft model.
CUL3(KBTBD8) monoubiquitylates NOLC1 and its paralogue TCOF1, the mutation of which underlies the neurocristopathy Treacher Collins syndrome.
Treacher Collins syndrome (TCS), a representative human ribosomopathy with craniofacial abnormalities, is attributed to mutations in the tcof1 gene that has a homologous gene called nopp140.
Previous studies suggest that NOLC1 is crucial for normal cell growth, and plays a role in the regulation of tumorigenesis of nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) and demonstrate that both NOLC1 and tumor protein 53 work synergistically to activate the MDM2 promoter in NPC cells.
Yet, the functioning of NOLC1 in liver cancer remains unknown.
In this study, we showed that NOLC1 was silenced or downregulated in liver tumor tissues when compared with that in the matched non-cancer tissues.
Low expression of NOLC1 in hepatoma cell lines and liver cancer tissues was associated with cyclin D3.
In conclusion, our study demonstrated that DNA methylation is a key mechanism of silenced NOLC1 expression in human hepatocellular carcinoma cells, and NOLC1 gene hypermethylation of the four CpG dinucleotides is a potential biomarker for hepatocellular carcinoma.
Severe combined immunodeficiency mice bearing NPC xenografts derived from NOLC1-short hairpin-RNA-transfected animals were found to have 82% lower levels of tumor growth than control mice as well as marked tumor cell apoptosis.
The aim of the study was to examine the effects of endurance exercise on circulating vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (sVCAM-1) and intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (sICAM-1) in sickle cell trait (SCT) athletes with or without alpha-thalassemia.
The aim of the study was to examine the effects of exercise on soluble vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (sVCAM-1) and intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (sICAM-1) in sickle cell trait (SCT) athletes with or without alpha-thalassemia.
As compared to normal, increased sICAM-1 was found in beta-thal/HbE patients with non-splenectomy; BE-NS (p = 0.002), increased ELAM-1 in beta-thal/HbE patients with splenectomy; BE-S (p = 0.01) and HbH with Hb Constant Spring; HbH/CS (p = 0.001), and increased sVCAM-1 in BE-NS; (p = &lt; 0.0001) and BE-S (p = 0.002).
Furthermore, treatment with AST or DEX significantly suppressed the mRNA and protein expression levels of the transcription factor GATA-3 and retinoic acid receptor-related orphan nuclear receptor (ROR)Gammat in tissue samples isolated from the spleen and nasal mucosa of mice with allergic rhinitis.
The present results suggested that treatment with AST may attenuate OVA-induced allergic rhinitis via regulating the expression of the transcription factors GATA-3, RORGammat, T-bet and Foxp3, which commit T helper cells to the Th1 phenotype.
Canagliflozin was associated with a low incidence of hypoglycemia when used with background AHAs that are not associated with hypoglycemia; the incidence was higher among patients on background AHAs associated with hypoglycemia (i.e.
Canagliflozin was associated with a low incidence of hypoglycemia when not used in conjunction with AHAs associated with hypoglycemia (i.e., insulin or sulfonylurea).
Adding different AHAs to metformin was associated with varying effects on HbA1c, BW, SBP, hypoglycemia, UTI and GTI which should impact clinician choice when selecting adjunctive therapy.
It has been shown at least four mutations of mitochondrial genome, namely, A1555G in MT-RNR1 gene, C3256T in MT-TL1 gene, G12315A in MT-TL2 gene, and G15059A in MT-CYB gene have significantly higher prevalence and mean value in lipofibrous plaques as compared to non-atherosclerotic intima, and therefore are associated with atherosclerosis.
Ten mitochondrial mutations belonging to mitochondrial genes MT-RNR1 (rRNA 12S); MT-TL1 (tRNA-Leu, recognizes UUR); MT-TL2 (tRNA-Leu, recognizes CUN); MT-ND1, MT-ND2, MT-ND5, and MT-ND6 (subunits 1, 2, 5, and 6, respectively, of NADH dehydrogenase); and MT-CYB (cytochrome b) were potentially associated with atherosclerosis.
The vectors of chikungunya and dengue virus, Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus, the vector of lymphatic filariasis, Culex quinquefasciatus, and that of Japanese encephalitis, Culex tritaeniorhynchus, were found from 70 to 2,000 m asl in eastern Nepal.
The results of an examination of a paraffin block histopathology specimen by fluorescence in-situ hybridization (FISH) showed no mucosa associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma translocation gene 1 (MALT1) (18q21.1), B-cell lymphoma 2 (BCL2) (18q21.3), or BCL6 (3q27) split signals in either the uterus or the greater omentum, however, trisomy 18 was detected in approximately 50%-70% of the tumor cells in both the uterus and the greater omentum.
The following abnormalities were most frequently observed: rearrangements involving 14q32, 19q13, 19p13, 1p, 3q27, and 8q24; del(6q); dup(1q); and trisomy 18.
Passive avoidance test showed four Group rats shuttle times were 6.8+/-0.6, 1.2+/-0.2, 5.4+/-0.5, 3.6+/-0.3, incubation period were 26.1+/-3.9, 152.2+/-12.9, 65.8+/-7.0, 91.2+/-9.1, and water maze test had the same trend, with values in epilepsy groups significantly lower than the normal group of rats, which meant cognitive dysfunction.The above results also showed Baclofen further inhibited the learning and memory ability of the rats and CGP35348 promoted the learning and memory ability.The results of the Arc/Arg3.1 and GB1, GB2 level detection showed that epilepsy groups had significantly higher expression levels of Arc/Arg3.1 and GB1, GB2 than the normal group.Comparison among epilepsy groups showed that Baclofen group expressed lower levels of Arc/Arg3.1 and expressed higher levels of GB1, GB2, however CGP35348 group expressed higher levels of Arc/Arg3.1 and expressed lower levels of GB1, GB2.
To search for the mechanism causing clinically silent corticotroph adenoma, we immunohistochemically examined the expression of prohormone convertase 1/3 (PC1/3) in this type of adenoma and compared our results with those obtained for Cushing's disease.
In the present study, we tested the therapeutic and immunomodulatory effects of FTS and its derivative 5-fluoro-FTS (F-FTS) in the rat adjuvant-induced arthritis model (AIA).
MR features were scored (0-3) following the Oslo hand OA score: BMLs, synovitis, cysts, flexor tenosynovitis (FTS).
BMLs, synovitis, cysts, FTS and ETI were demonstrated in 56%, 90%, 22%, 16% and 30% of patients, respectively.
BMLs (grade 2/3 vs 0: 3.5 (1.6-7.7)) and synovitis (3 vs 0: OR 3.6 (95% CI 1.9-6.6)) were severity-dependent associated with joint pain, but FTS and ETI were not.
Infectious flexor tenosynovitis (FTS) is a serious infection of the hand and wrist that can lead to necrosis and amputation without prompt diagnosis and surgical debridement.
Our objective in this work was to investigate the anti-inflammatory effects of the Ras inhibitor farnesylthiosalicylic acid (FTS) on adjuvant-induced arthritis (AIA) in rats, an experimental model for RA.
Diabetic patients are susceptible to stenosing flexor tenosynovitis (FTS) and may have a diminished response to treatment.
With the rising participation of women in sports events, the prevalence of eating disorders and the female athlete triad (FTS), a syndrome of disordered eating, amenorrhea, and osteoporosis, have also increased in recent years.
Dupuytren's contracture (DC) (42 vs. 29.3%, respectively; P=0.01), limited joint mobility (LJM) (39 vs. 28.5%, respectively; P=0.01) and carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS) (5.3 vs. 1%, respectively; P=0.01) were significantly higher in T2DM patients than in the controls, but not stenosing flexor tenosynovitis (FTS, 'trigger finger').
Data from several studies suggest that the gastrin family of growth factors potentiates colorectal cancer tumourigenesis.
The aim of this study was to investigate whether progastrin expression may predict clinical outcome in colorectal cancer.
This is the first study to show that progastrin expression may be predictive of aggressive tumour behaviour in patients with colorectal cancer and supports its clinical relevance and potential use as a biomarker.
The aim of this study was to analyze plasma concentrations of enterohormones (motilin, ghrelin, gastrin and pancreatic polypeptide) and to verify if their abnormal levels may contribute to the severity of dyspeptic symptoms in colorectal cancer patients.
This study examined the expression level, subcellular localization, and binding activity of CacyBP/SIP in human colon cancer cells in the presence and absence of the hormone gastrin.
CacyBP/SIP promoted the cell proliferation of colon cancer cells under both basal and gastrin stimulated conditions as shown by knockdown studies.
As treatment with proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) increases the biosynthesis and secretion of gastrin, it has been postulated that treatment with PPIs could increase the risk of cancer, especially in Barrett's esophagus, gastric carcinoids, and colorectal cancer (CRC).
Pathological studies showed lymph nodes metastasis in 2 patients with pancreatic gastrinomas, and in one patient with duodenal gastrinoma.
A progressive increase in the expression of PD-1 and B7-H1/B7-DC on T cells and APC, respectively, was observed in the pancreatic lymph nodes of female non-obese diabetic (NOD) mice as they developed diabetes.
B7-H1 and B7-DC have negative regulatory effects upon binding PD-1 on activated T cells and B7-H1 deficiency increases severity of both diabetes and EAE.
These characteristics have implicated KIR3DL2 in several pathologies: ankylosing spondylitis and cutaneous T-cell lymphomas such as Sezary syndrome, CD30+ cutaneous lymphoma, and transformed mycosis fungoides.
KIR3DL2, an inhibitory receptor expressed by natural killer cells and a subset of normal CD8(+) T cells, is aberrantly expressed in neoplastic cells in transformed mycosis fungoides and Sezary syndrome.
Not only we confirmed the expression of this marker in the blood and/or skin of mycosis fungoides patients but we also show for the first time CD158k expression (often associated with CD160) on cutaneous CD4+ T cells from healthy individuals (25.3 +/- 15%).
Therefore, CD4+ CD160+ T cells expressing CD158k might represent specialized cutaneous lymphocytes devoted to immune surveillance, from which could originate cutaneous T-cell lymphomas such as mycosis fungoides.
p140/KIR3DL2 has been identified in malignant cell lines isolated from the skin and blood of patients with transformed mycosis fungoides (MF) and Sezary's syndrome (SS).
Chromosomal aberration (DS especially) are among the most frequent prenatally diagnosed birth defects, further being heart defects, neural tube defects (anencephaly, encephalocele, spina bifida), hydrocephalus, congenital skeletal system defects, abdominal wall defects (omphalocele, gastroschisis) and renal defects.
In some defects, prenatal diagnostics has also significantly influenced their incidence in births (anencephaly, gastroschisis and DS e.g.
The Fxn KO/Mck model reproduces some key features of patients with Friedreich ataxia and provides an opportunity of ameliorating their symptoms with experimental therapies.
Further confirmation is obtained with identification of two mutations in the ARSB gene for MPS VI or mutations in the GALNS gene for MPS IVA.We report slowly progressing patients, one with MPS VI and two with MPS IVA, who presented with skeletal changes and hip findings resembling Legg-Calve-Perthes disease or spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia and normal/near normal urine GAG levels.
We identified genes that might be truly causative, but GWAS might have failed to identify for 148 out of the GWAS-identified SNPs; for example, TUFM (P = 3.3E-48) was identified for inflammatory bowel disease (early onset); ZFP90 (P = 4.4E-34) for ulcerative colitis; and IDUA (P = 2.2E-11) for Parkinson's disease.
Apart from allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA) and mould-caused mycoses, only sufficient evidence for an association between moisture/mould damage and the following health effects has been established: allergic respiratory disease, asthma (manifestation, progression and exacerbation), allergic rhinitis, hypersensitivity pneumonitis (extrinsic allergic alveolitis), and increased likelihood of respiratory infections/bronchitis.
We studied the relationship between GORD and allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA), chronic pulmonary aspergillosis (CPA), or Aspergillus bronchitis.
We reviewed four patients referred with elevated Aspergillus serology markers and marked pulmonary symptoms for ABPA, CPA, and Aspergillus bronchitis, and discussed the underlying pathophysiological relationship with GORD.
Data were collected retrospectively from medical records included age, gender, predisposing factors for ABPA, chronic pulmonary aspergillosis, or Aspergillus bronchitis; presence of nocturnal reflux, nausea, epigastric pain, Medical Research Council dyspnea scale score, pH manometry data, endoscopic results (ulcers, Barrett's esophagus), treatment of GORD [proton-pump inhibitors (PPIs), surgical operation]; history of smoking, alcohol consumption; concomitant COPD; serological markers (anti-Aspergillus IgG, anti-Aspergillus IgE), and antifungal treatment.
One had ABPA, one CPA, and two had Aspergillus bronchitis; median age was 57 years [range 39-71]; males-to-females ratio was 1:3.
Apart from the allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA) and the mycoses caused by mold, there is only sufficient evidence for the following associations between moisture/mold damages and different health effects: Allergic respiratory diseases, asthma (manifestation, progression, exacerbation), allergic rhinitis, exogenous allergic alveolitis and respiratory tract infections/bronchitis.
can lead to allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA), Aspergillus sensitisation and Aspergillus bronchitis in CF.
Published proportions of ABPA (17.7%), Aspergillus sensitisation (14.6%) and Aspergillus bronchitis (30%) in CF were applied to those &gt;18 years and compared with notified ABPA cases.
Aspergillus sensitisation, associated with increased bronchiectasis and reduced FEV1, affects an anticipated 5,506 patients without ABPA or Aspergillus bronchitis.
Together ABPA and Aspergillus bronchitis are estimated to affect 17,989 adults, 47.7% of the adult CF population.
Itraconazole is prescribed for allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA) or Aspergillus bronchitis in CF subjects.
We selected an average of five serum samples from each of the 17 patients with ABPA (13 proven and 4 probable ABPA) and from 3 patients with Aspergillus bronchitis and rhinosinusitis.
Patients were diagnosed with ABPA and Aspergillus bronchitis related to innate immune defects.
Yeasts and filamentous fungi are beginning to emerge as significant microbial pathogens in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF), particularly in relation to allergic-type responses, as seen in patients with allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA), Aspergillus bronchitis and in invasive fungal disease in lung transplant patients.
On the other hand, a widespread positive reaction for CK 5/8, CK 7, CK 19, and negative reaction for CK 10, was a helpful feature in the differentiation of Paget's disease from Bowen's disease and BAK.
To date, the relation between serum leptin levels of dialysis patients and renal osteodystrophy, defined by histomorphometric and histodynamic parameters of bone, has not been studied.
For 100 years, it has been obvious that Salmonella enterica strains sharing the serotype with the formula 1,4,[5],12:b:1,2-now known as Paratyphi B-can cause diseases ranging from serious systemic infections to self-limiting gastroenteritis.
Interestingly, in the case of breast cancer patients, this phenomenon correlated with high expression level of several molecular chaperones belonging to the HSPA, DNAJB and HSPC families.
Unexpectedly, conditioning before HSPC infusion was required to protect the mice from lymphoma developing when transplanting small numbers of progenitors.
Here, we evaluated the potency of highly active NK cells derived from human CD34+ haematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPC) to infiltrate and mediate killing of human ovarian cancer spheroids using an in vivo-like model system and mouse xenograft model.
These CD56+Perforin+ HSPC-NK cells were generated under stroma-free conditions in the presence of StemRegenin-1, IL-15, and IL-12, and exerted efficient cytolytic activity and IFNGamma production toward ovarian cancer monolayer cultures.
Live-imaging confocal microscopy demonstrated that these HSPC-NK cells actively migrate, infiltrate, and mediate tumor cell killing in a three-dimensional multicellular ovarian cancer spheroid.
Furthermore, intraperitoneal HSPC-NK cell infusions in NOD/SCID-IL2RGammanull (NSG) mice bearing ovarian carcinoma significantly reduced tumor progression.
These findings demonstrate that highly functional HSPC-NK cells efficiently destruct ovarian carcinoma spheroids in vitro and kill intraperitoneal ovarian tumors in vivo, providing great promise for effective immunotherapy through intraperitoneal HSPC-NK cell adoptive transfer in ovarian carcinoma patients.
Treatment with vitamin C, a co-factor of Fe2+ and Alfa-KG-dependent dioxygenases, mimics TET2 restoration by enhancing 5-hydroxymethylcytosine formation in Tet2-deficient mouse HSPCs and suppresses human leukemic colony formation and leukemia progression of primary human leukemia PDXs.
We quantified extracellular IL-16 protein (ELISA) and intracellular IL-16 in NK cells, T-cells, B-cells, and monocytes (flow cytometry) in blood samples from long-term tobacco smokers with and without chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and in never-smokers.
In asthmatic children with positive ETC, monocyte hemotactic protein-1 (MCP-1) and IL-16 adjusted to pre-EBC forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) were significantly higher compared to children with negative ETC (p = 0.022 and p = 0.017 respectively).
Compared with the control group, silica dust exposed group, the observation group of objects, the pneumosilicosis patients of IL-16 in induced sputum IL-16 (21.40 +/- 9.24) decreased, the content of PDGF [(5.96 +/- 0.51) ng/L], MMP-2 [(447.86 +/- 27.10) ng/L], MMP-9 [(223.91 +/- 12.28) ng/L], MCP-1 [(122.87 +/- 6.08) ng/L] increased, the differences are statistically significant (P &lt; 0.05).
As silicosis biomarkers, TNF-alpha, TGF-beta, IL-16, PDGF, MMP-2, MMP-9 and MCP-1 have certain significance, further suggesting that early detection rate of patients with silicosis can be improved by employing the multiple indexes discriminate equation.
By contrast, compared to eosinophil-normal asthma (eosinophils&lt;=0.3%), eosinophil-high asthma (eosinophils&gt;0.3%) had higher levels of IL-5, IL-13, IL-16, and PDGF-bb, but same neutrophil percentage, IL-8, and FEV1.
Here, we demonstrate that DRG1 is elevated in lung adenocarcinomas while weakly expressed in adjacent lung tissues.
To this end, we describe the identification of developmentally regulated GTP-binding protein 1 (DRG-1) as a melanoma-associated antigen recognized by HLA-DR11-restricted CD4(+) Th1 cells.
Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction revealed that DRG-1 was highly expressed in melanoma cell lines but not in normal tissues.
DRG-1 knockdown by lentiviral-based shRNA suppressed melanoma cell proliferation and soft agar colony formation.
Taken together, these data suggest that DRG-1 plays an important role in melanoma cell growth and transformation, indicating that DRG1 may represent a novel target for CD4(+) T cell-mediated immunotherapy in melanoma.
FBXW7 mRNA was identified as a direct target of miR-155 in glioma.
Finally, we found that MALAT1 positively regulated FBXW7 expression, which was responsible for glioma progression mediated by MALAT1-miR-155 pathway.
Besides those, Fbxw7 activity is controlled at different levels, resulting in specific and tunable regulation of the abundance and activity of its substrates in a variety of human solid tumor types, including glioma malignancy, nasopharyngeal carcinoma, osteosarcoma, melanoma as well as colorectal, lung, breast, gastric, liver, pancreatic, renal, prostate, endometrial, and esophageal cancers.
Subsequently, miR-15/16 activities are reduced and many of their direct targets are de-repressed, including ubiquitin ligase FBXW7 that destabilizes Cyclin E. Conversely, GBM cells expressing low p21 level, or after p21 knock-down, exhibit weaker or no E2F1 response to miR-10b inhibition.
Notch pathway genes are overexpressed in ependymomas and gliomas along with FBXW7 downregulation.
We propose that p53 mutations contribute to gliomagenesis by both allowing the overexpression of c-Myc through downregulation of Fbxw7 and by protecting against c-Myc-induced apoptosis.
PMD is located adjacent and medial to the nucleus prepositus hypoglossi (PH) in the dorsal medulla and is distinguished by the pattern of immunoreactivity of cells and fibers to several markers including calcium-binding proteins, a synthetic enzyme for nitric oxide (neuronal nitric oxide synthase, nNOS) and a nonphosphorylated neurofilament protein (antibody SMI-32).
Cells in PMD are also immunoreactive to nNOS, and immunoreactivity to a neurofilament protein shows many labeled cells and fibers.
Regardless of the type of surgery (PRE-OP, POS-OP1, POS-OP2), the prevalence of periodontitis proved to be high (81.45%).
There was a statistically significant difference in the prevalence of periodontitis among the PRE-OP, POS-OP1, and POS-OP2 groups (P = 0.040).
Long-term studies with gamma-irradiated 0.5 and 2.5mg hOP-1 per gram of xenogeneic bovine collagenous matrix induce the restitutio ad integrum of the periodontal tissues in furcation defects exposed by chronic periodontitis in P. ursinus.
Bone morphogenetic protein-7 (BMP 7) induces cementogenesis in periodontitis-associated periodontal ligament (PDL) defects.
Both KRT19 and ANXA8 mRNA may be useful markers for detecting lymph node metastases in OSCC patients.
None of the NF1 glioblastomas harbored isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 (IDH1) gene mutation, v-RAF murine sarcoma viral oncogene homolog B1 (BRAF) gene mutation, and telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT) gene promoter mutation.
Somatic v-Raf murine sarcoma viral oncogene homolog B (BRAF) mutation, present in approximately 10% of metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC) cases, is associated with poor prognosis.
All colorectal cancer patients tested for BRAF mutation, from October 2010 to November 2014 were identified.
We highlight common mechanistic themes underpinning resistance to targeted therapies that are shared by NSCLC subtypes, including those with oncogenic alterations in epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK), ROS1 proto-oncogene receptor tyrosine kinase (ROS1), serine/threonine-protein kinase b-raf (BRAF) and other less established oncoproteins.
Here, we investigated the response of normal human keratinocytes to the MEK inhibitors trametinib and cobimetinib, alone and in combination with the v-Raf murine sarcoma viral oncogene homolog B (BRAF) inhibitors dabrafenib and vemurafenib, in terms of signal transduction and de novo gene expression.
The prognostic role of the V600E mutation of v-raf murine sarcoma viral oncogene homolog B1 (BRAF) in metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC) is well established, but the therapeutic regimen targeting this disease is lacking.
Kirsten rat sarcoma viral oncogene homolog (KRAS), neuroblastoma RAS viral oncogene homolog (NRAS), and BRAF mutational status was assayed using direct sequencing.
We performed an unbiased CRISPR-Cas9 knockout screen on melanoma cells that were both resistant and addicted to inhibition of the serine/threonine-protein kinase BRAF, in order to functionally mine their genome for 'addiction genes'.
In patients with melanoma that had progressed during treatment with a BRAF inhibitor, treatment cessation was followed by increased expression of the receptor tyrosine kinase AXL, which is associated with the phenotype switch.
v-raf murine sarcoma viral oncogene homolog B1 (BRAF)-mutant anaplastic xanthoastrocytomas and gangliogliomas may benefit from BRAF and mitogen-activated protein kinase inhibitors.
Mutations in the proto-oncogene B-raf (BRAF) occur in approximately 3% of NSCLC cases.
To our knowledge, this is only the second well-documented case of gastrointestinal metastasis from BRAF-mutated lung cancer.
Changes in the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene, Kirsten rat sarcoma viral oncogene (KRAS), v-Raf murine sarcoma viral oncogene homolog B (BRAF), gene encoding neurofibromin (NF1), anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) and ROS1 are the main genes that suffer alterations in the tumors of patients with ADC.
For example, "Mongolism" was changed to Down's syndrome; "Australia" antigen to HBsAg; "Mexican" Swine flu to H1N1; "GRID" (Gay Related Immune Deficiency) and 4H-Disease (Haitians, Homosexuals, Haemophiliacs and Heroin Users Disease) to AIDS.
WHEN IT WAS CALLED 'GRID': One year ago today, I told my colleagues that I was dying of AIDS.
APL are significantly influenced by azole dose, age, cystic fibrosis, type of LTx, and comedication with proton-pump inhibitors.
DMSG = DutchMEN1 Study Group; D-NET = duodenal neuroendocrine tumor; DP-NET = duodenopancreatic neuroendocrine tumor; HPF = high-power field; Ki67 LI = Ki67 labeling index; MEN1 = multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1; NET = neuroendocrine tumor; OS = overall survival; P-NET = pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor; PPI = proton pump inhibitor; ULN = upper limit of normal; WHO = World Health Organization.
APL are significantly influenced by azole dose, age, cystic fibrosis, type of LTx, and co-medication with proton-pump inhibitors.
In both cases, the diagnosis of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 was made after proton pump therapy was discontinued.
Clinical assessment for features of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (eg, serum calcium levels, personal and family history of hypercalcemia, pituitary or pancreatic tumors) could identify patients with higher risk for a tumoral source of hypergastrinemia where imaging studies can help support the diagnosis without the potential side effects of abrupt discontinuation of proton pump inhibitor therapy.
No correlation was detected between Ki-67 values of HGPs in CLD patients and the presence of portal hypertension, infection with Helicobacter pylori, or proton pump inhibitor use.
Mutation screening and phenotypic profiling of 2 amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-(ALS) and frontotemporal dementia-(FTD) associated genes, CHCHD10 and TUBA4A, were performed in a Belgian cohort of 459 FTD, 28 FTD-ALS, and 429 ALS patients.
In TUBA4A, we detected a novel frameshift mutation (p.Arg64Glyfs*90) leading to a truncated protein in 1 FTD patient (1/459 of 0.22%) with family history of Parkinson's disease and cognitive impairment, and a novel missense mutation (p.Thr381Met) in 2 sibs with familial ALS and memory problems (1 index patient/429, 0.23%) in whom we previously identified a pathogenic Chromosome 9 open reading frame 72 repeat expansion mutation.
The present study confirms the role of CHCHD10 and TUBA4A in the FTD-ALS spectrum, although genetic variations in these 2 genes are extremely rare in the Belgian population and often associated with symptomatology of related neurodegenerative diseases including Parkinson's disease and Alzheimer's disease.
The tubulin alpha 4a (TUBA4A) gene has been recently associated with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
TUBA4A gene has recently been identified as a potential candidate amyotrophic lateral sclerosis(ALS)-associated gene using exome-wide rare variant burden analysis.
Here we studied the physiological function of CLAC-P/collagen XXV, a transmembrane-type collagen originally identified as a component of senile plaque amyloid of Alzheimer's disease brains, by means of generating Col25a1-deficient (KO) mice.
Collagen XXV alpha 1 (COL25A1) is a collagenous type II transmembrane protein purified from senile plaques of Alzheimer's disease (AD) brains.
The COL25A1 gene, located in 4q25, encodes the CLAC protein, which has been implicated in Alzheimer's disease (AD) pathogenesis.
Thus, in addition to the biochemical data, there is now genetic evidence of association between COL25A1 and risk for Alzheimer's disease.
Recently, a novel plaque-associated protein, collagenous Alzheimer amyloid plaque component (CLAC), was identified in brains from patients with Alzheimer's disease.
The biological function and the contribution of CLAC to the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease and plaque formation are unknown.
CLAC (collagenous Alzheimer amyloid plaque component) is a proteolytic fragment derived from a novel membrane-bound collagen, CLAC-P/collagen type XXV, that deposits in senile plaques associated with amyloid beta peptides (Abeta) in the brains of patients with Alzheimer's disease.
These results suggest the anti-amyloidogenic roles of CLAC in the pathophysiology of Alzheimer's disease.
The analysis of breast cancer and pancreatic cancer data further shows iSPCA's satisfactory performance.
Tissue factor (TF) is a transmembrane receptor for coagulation factor VII/VIIa and is frequently overexpressed by cancer cells.
To identify the location of missed significant prostate cancer (sPCa) lesions by transrectal ultrasound-guided biopsy (TRUSbx) and multiparametric magnetic resonance imaging-guided biopsy (mpMRIbx) in men undergoing repeat biopsies.
Of the 289 patients, prostate cancer was detected in 128 (44%) with 88 (30%) having sPCa.
Overall, 165 separate prostate cancer lesions were detected with 100 being sPCa.
Factor VII (FVII) activating protease (FSAP) is a circulating serine protease that is likely to be involved in a number of disease conditions such as stroke, atherosclerosis, liver fibrosis, thrombosis and cancer.
In the absence of factor VII in platelet-free plasma, thrombin generation in solid pancreatic cancer cell lines was significantly reduced unlike in haematological cell lines.
SPCA gene expression is significantly elevated in breast cancer subtypes that are associated with microcalcifications.
Clinically significant cancer (SPCa) was defined as Gleason score &gt;=3 + 4.
Heritable disorders of connective tissue (marfan syndrome, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, adult polycystic kidney disease, floppy mitral valve/mitral valve prolapse); congenital heart disease (bicuspid aortic valve); inflammatory/immunologic disorders (rheumatic fever, AIDS, Kawasaki disease, syphilis, seronegative spondyloarthropathies, systemic lupus erythematosus, antiphospholipid syndrome); endocardial disorders (nonbacteremic thrombotic endocarditis, infective endocarditis, endomyocardial fibroelastosis); myocardial dysfunction (ischemic heart disease, dilated cardiomyopathy, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy); diseases and disorders of other organs (chronic renal failure, carcinoid heart disease); aging (calcific aortic stenosis, mitral annular calcification); postinterventional valvular disease; drugs and physical agents are all clinical entities associated with VHD.
Described here is an autopsy case of a 61-year-old man with polycystic kidney disease who had P. multocida bacteremia and acute infective endocarditis with multiple bacterial clumps involving bicuspid aortic valve.
Twenty-five people with COPD + PC (mean (standard deviation (SD)) age 73 (11) years, Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) stage II-IV), 25 people with COPD (70 (8) years, GOLD stage II-IV) and 25 controls (70 (7) years) wore the SenseWear Pro3 Armband for 7 days.
Patients with severe atopic dermatitis had a decreased CD4+CD29+: CD4+CD45RA+ ratio (p &lt; 0.01).
No significant changes in the CD4+CD29+: CD4+CD45RA+ ratio were found in the peripheral blood of patients with clinically mild or moderate atopic dermatitis.
Tissue sections from the skin of patients with atopic dermatitis were investigated by means of hematoxylin-eosin staining, the avidin-biotin-peroxidase complex method, and double-labeling immunofluorescence using monoclonal antibodies to cell-surface antigens, including CD45R and CD29.
These novel data demonstrate the role of HDAC2-mediated epigenetic mechanisms in anxiety and alcoholism.
The mRNA levels of cholesterol transport regulators ABCA1 and ABCG1 were markedly downregulated by UVB, parallel to the lamellar ichthyosis related glucosylceramide transporter ABCA12 and the suspected sphingosine-1-phosphate and cholesterol sulfate transporter ABCC1.
To investigate the potential tumour suppressor functions of glutathione peroxidase 7 (GPX7) and examine the interplay between epigenetic and genetic events in regulating its expression in oesophageal adenocarcinomas (OAC).
The goal of this study was to investigate the expression and secretion levels in vitro and in vivo of kallikrein 10 in uterine serous papillary carcinoma, a highly aggressive variant of endometrial tumor.
Human kallikrein 10 gene expression levels were evaluated in 11 snap-frozen uterine serous papillary carcinoma biopsies and 6 normal endometrial cell biopsies by real-time polymerase chain reaction.
Secretion of kallikrein 10 protein by 10 primary tumor cultures including 3 uterine serous papillary carcinomas, 2 endometrioid carcinomas, and 5 ovarian serous papillary tumors was measured using a sensitive ELISA.
Finally, kallikrein 10 concentration in 75 serum and plasma samples from 22 healthy women, 20 women with benign diseases, 21 women with endometrioid carcinomas, and 12 uterine serous papillary carcinoma patients was studied.
Kallikrein 10 gene expression levels were significantly higher in uterine serous papillary carcinoma when compared with normal endometrial cell biopsies (mean copy number by real time polymerase chain reaction = 743 versus 1.4; uterine serous papillary carcinoma versus endometrioid carcinoma: P &lt; .02).
In vitro kallikrein 10 secretion was detected in all primary uterine serous papillary carcinoma cell lines tested (mean = 2.7 microg/L), and the secretion levels were not significantly different to those found in primary ovarian serous papillary tumor cultures (mean 4.2 microg/L).
In contrast, serum and plasma kallikrein 10 values in uterine serous papillary carcinoma patients (1.2 +/- 0.1) were significantly higher than those in the non-cancer group (P = .002), benign group (P = .002), and endometrioid carcinoma patients (P = .005).
Kallikrein 10 is highly expressed in uterine serous papillary carcinoma, and it is released in the plasma and serum of uterine serous papillary carcinoma patients.
Kallikrein 10 may represent a novel biomarker for uterine serous papillary carcinoma.
The present investigation was designed to clarify the role of the subcommissural organ (SCO) in the pathogenesis of hydrocephalus occurring in the HTx rat.
At the same time, it functions as a transcriptional regulator of particular genes and as a cytokine: HMGB-1 released from a defective cell has been reported to induce damage to the adjacent cells.With a view to examine the relationship between neuronal damage caused by hydrocephalus and HMGB-1, we analyzed the expression of HMGB-1 in the cerebellum, cerebrum, and hippocampus of 1-day-old congenitally hydrocephalic H-Tx rats.As opposed to nonhydrocephalic H-Tx rats, the hydrocephalic H-Tx rats were observed to show stronger expression of HMGB-1 in the cerebellum, cerebrum, and hippocampus.
All studies utilized an animal model such as AQP4-knockout mice, H-Tx rats, and kaolin and L-Alfa-lysophosphatidylcholine (LPC) stearoyl injection models of hydrocephalus.
The purpose of this study was to determine the efficacy of minocycline, an antibiotic known for its anti-inflammatory properties, to reduce gliosis in the H-Tx rat model of congenital hydrocephalus.
It has been well documented that up to 70% of H-Tx rats' offspring suffer from severe hydrocephalus, which can be fatal if it remains untreated.
Aside from the well-documented hydrocephalus, H-Tx rats may develop other intracranial malformations that have not yet been documented in the literature.
We investigated the effect of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-C on lymphangiogenesis, inflammation, and fibrosis in the mouse kidney using the unilateral ureteral obstruction (UUO) model.
Renal fibrosis was consequently attenuated in the UUO+VEGF-C group.
Enhancement of the VEGF-C signaling pathway in LECs may be a therapeutic strategy for renal fibrosis.Laboratory Investigation advance online publication, 30 October 2017; doi:10.1038/labinvest.2017.77.
However, the relevance of urinary and circulating VEGF-A165b levels in chronic kidney disease patients remains unclear.
Therefore, the present study aimed to investigate the urinary and circulating VEGF-A165b levels in patients with chronic kidney disease.
A low urinary VEGF-A165b level reflects renal dysfunction in the chronic kidney disease stage, while a high circulating VEGF-A165b level cannot be attributed to decreased renal clearance.
By using a novel, advanced, multicolor fluorescence in situ hybridization approach, we enumerated copy numbers of six genes previously identified by array comparative genomic hybridization to be involved in aggressive prostate cancer [TBL1XR1, CTTNBP2, MYC (alias c-myc), PTEN, MEN1, and PDGFB] in six nonrecurrent and seven recurrent radical prostatectomy cases.
The identification of higher NIHSS scores, higher HAMD scores, lower dopamine level, lower 5-hydroxytryptamine level, higher tumor necrosis factor-Alfa level, and lower nerve growth factor level might be useful for clinicians in recognizing and treating depression in patients after a stroke.
Other effects include a reduction in the platelet levels of adenosine triphosphate (ATP), serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine), platelet factor 3 (PF3), PF4 and Beta-thromboglobulin (BTG), decreased platelet adhesiveness in platelets from healthy volunteers and from atherosclerotic patients and an improvement in red blood cell deformability in patients with occlusive vascular disease.
Objective: To explore the effect of trimetazidine pre-treatments on serum 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) and serotonin transporter (SERT), platelet 5-HT and SERT in the Sprague Dawley rats with myocardial infarction(MI), depression, and myocardial infarction co-exist with depression (MI+ depression) and in sham operated rats.
The role of histone deacetylase-3 (HDAC3) in allergic skin inflammation was reported.
In this study, we investigated SERPINA3 expression in glioma tissue samples and its significance in predicting the prognosis of glioma patients.
We found that SERPINA3 was upregulated in glioma tissue at both mRNA and protein levels, compared with noncancerous brain tissues.
We also found that high SERPINA3 expression in glioma tissues correlated significantly with advanced World Health Organization grade.
Univariate and multivariate analyses revealed that high SERPINA3 expression was an independent prognostic factor for poor overall survival of glioma patients.
Taken together, our results suggest that SERPINA3 plays an oncogenic role in glioma progression and provide an insight into the application of SERPINA3 as a novel predictor of clinical outcomes and a potential biomarker of glioma.
To investigate the expression and prognostic value of Alfa1-ACT (Alpha1-antichymotrypsin) in patients with HCC (hepatocellular carcinoma) and identify the mechanism by which Alfa1-ACT inhibits proliferation and promotes apoptosis of HCC.
Deletions were found in LEC1 (9.5% versus 14.3%), LEC2 (4.8% versus 14.3%), cagT (33.3% versus 28.6%), cagE (28.6% versus 28.6%) and the promoter region of the cagA (19.0% versus 42.9%) of gastritis and PUD strains, respectively.
In the seven women, increased FDG uptake was due to physiological endometrial uptake (n=2), leiomyoma (n=1), corpus luteum cyst (n=1), physiological ovarian uptake (n=1), urinary leak (n=1), and nonspecific colitis (n=1).
The most significant quantitative trait locus, Hsm1 (hereditary spherocytosis modifier 1), localizes to mouse Chromosome 12 and is dominant.
Rates of noninfective synovitis and effusion ranged from 0.2% in the LARS ACL group to 27.6% in the Gore-Tex ACL group.
Preliminary results for newer-generation devices, specifically the LARS, show lower reported rates of failure, revision, and sterile effusion/synovitis when compared with older devices.
The Ligament Augmentation and Reconstruction System (LARS) is a third generation of synthetic ligament, designed to overcome the issues of graft failure and synovitis which led previous generations of synthetic ligaments to fall out of favour.
Usher syndrome type III (USH3), characterized by progressive deafness, variable balance disorder and blindness, is caused by destabilizing mutations in the gene encoding the clarin-1 (CLRN1) protein.
Mutations in the CLRN1 gene cause Usher syndrome type 3 (USH3), a human disease characterized by progressive blindness and deafness.
Taken together, CD47 might be a novel target to enhance anti-PD-1 and CLTA-4 efficacy in esophageal squamous cell cancer.
Ipilimumab, a humanized CLTA-4 antibody is a standard therapy in the treatment of advanced melanoma.
The most prominent example of this shift is the management of metastatic melanoma, where BRAF and MEK inhibition and CLTA-4 blockade have established an entirely new standard of care in the last 3 years.
This was associated with the decreased protein expression of Notch1, Notch2, Notch3 and Hey1, and the increased expression of the tumor suppressor microRNA (miR or miRNA)-200 family members (miR-200a, miR-200b, miR-200c, miR-141 and miR-429) that are typically downregulated in colon cancer.
Phosphorylated IGF-IR/IR (P-IGF-IR/IR) and its downstream signaling partner phospho-S6 (P-S6) were evaluated immunohistochemically in tumor tissue microarrays representing 438 cases of invasive breast cancer.
Importantly, P-IGF-IR/IR was detected in all breast cancer subtypes (luminal, 48.1%; triple negative, 41.9%; and HER2, 64.3%).
Thus, we can determine which patients have the activated receptor and provide evidence that P-IGF-IR/IR is a prognostic factor for breast cancer.
Beyond this, P-IGF-IR/IR could be a predictive marker for response to IGF-IR and/or IR-targeted therapies, as these inhibitors may be of benefit in all breast cancer subtypes including those with acquired resistance to tamoxifen.
The genes plo, fimA, fimC, fimE, fimG, nanH, nanP, and cbpA were investigated in 71 T. pyogenes strains recovered from cattle, sheep, goats, dogs, equines, and a pig, recovered from mastitis (n = 35), and non-mastitis (n = 36) cases (abscesses, reproductive tract diseases, pneumonia, lymphadenitis, encephalitis).
The aim was to assess the prevalence of anaemia among quranic schoolchildren in khalawi Wad EL Magboul village, rural Rufaa, Gezira State, central Sudan.
Thrombophilia was present in 294/482 (60.9%) patients: 189/350 LC (54.0%), 31/47 (66.0%) HCC, 29/39 (74.4%) MPN, 35/38 AD (92.1%), and 10/10 (100%) WAD, and 54/150 (36.0%) in HC.
A cross-sectional study was conducted to investigate the prevalence of anaemia, iron, zinc and copper deficiencies among pregnant women in Wad Medani hospital, central Sudan and to examine the relationship of these micronutrients with haemoglobin (Hb) levels.
In the orbivirinae this would result in 2 genera of cyanovirus (bluetongue, epizootic hemorrhagic disease, Eubenangee and Palyam sub-genera) and Kemerovovirus (Chenunda, Great Island, Kemerovo and Wad Medani sub-genera) and a number of ungrouped sub-genera (African horsesickness, Changuinola, Corriparta, equine encephalosis, Wallal and Warrego sub-genera and the remaining ungrouped viruses).
We examined the expression of CT-1, leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF), and gp130 by competitive RT-PCR and Western blotting in Dahl salt-sensitive (DS) rats with a high-salt diet, which showed a distinct transition from left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) to congestive heart failure (CHF).
New factors signaling independently of the leukemia inhibitory-factor receptor pathway may sustain cardiomyocyte cell proliferation and thus be a future target for gene therapy of cardiomyopathies and cell therapy of the myocardium.
We propose a model in which P-Rex1 acts as a crucial node for the integration of upstream inputs from HER/ErbB receptors and CXCR4 in luminal breast cancer cells.
Notably, there is a significant association in the expression of P-Rex1 and MMP10 in human luminal breast cancer, and their co-expression is indicative of poor prognosis.
Treatment of normal MCF-10A or basal-like cancer cells, MDA-MB-231 with the demethylating agent 5-aza-2'-deoxycitidine in combination with the histone deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin A restores P-REX1 levels to those observed in luminal breast cancer cell lines, suggesting that aberrant expression of P-REX1 in luminal breast cancer is a consequence of PREX1 promoter demethylation.
We identify 112 candidate ciliogenesis and ciliopathy genes, including 44 components of the ubiquitin-proteasome system, 12 G-protein-coupled receptors, and 3 pre-mRNA processing factors (PRPF6, PRPF8 and PRPF31) mutated in autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa.
Mutations in six spliceosomal proteins, PRPF3, PRPF4, PRPF6, PRPF8, PRPF31 and SNRNP200, cause retinitis pigmentosa (RP), a disease characterized by progressive photoreceptor degeneration.
In addition, a pAsn477Ser change in the neighboring gene PRPF6, a gene previously found to be associated with retinitis pigmentosa, segregated with the ADKD phenotype.
Yeast two-hybrid analyses suggest a link between retinitis pigmentosa and an aberrant hPrp31-hPrp6 interaction that blocks U4/U6-U5 tri-snRNP formation.
In humans and in mice, mutations in the Ostm1 gene cause the most severe form of osteopetrosis, a major bone disease, and neuronal degeneration, both of which are associated with early death.
Genetic defects in OSTM1 (osteopetrosis-associated transmembrane protein 1) cause autosomal recessive osteopetrosis in humans.
Thus, these findings suggest that autosomal recessive osteopetrosis patients with an OSTM1 gene mutation lacking the transmembrane domain produce a secreted form of truncated OSTM1 that inhibits osteoclastogenesis.
Loss of the lysosomal ClC-7/Ostm1 2Cl(-)/H(+) exchanger causes lysosomal storage disease and osteopetrosis in humans and additionally changes fur colour in mice.
Loss of Ostm1 leads to the most severe form of osteopetrosis in mice and humans.
Mice lacking either ClC-7 or Ostm1 develop a lysosomal storage disease and mutations in either protein have been found to underlie osteopetrosis in mice and humans.
Mice or humans lacking ClC-7 or Ostm1 display osteopetrosis and lysosomal storage disease.
Here we describe for the first time homozygous microdeletions of different sizes affecting the OSTM1 gene in two unrelated consanguineous families with children suffering from neuronopathic infantile malignant osteopetrosis.
Our findings are summarized as follows: i) BPY2 (testis basic protein on Y, 2), DAZ1 (deleted in azoospermia 1), TTY4 (testis transcript Y 4) mRNAs and 23 ESTs were found; ii) Eighteen of 23 ESTs were transcripts of the DAZ gene(s), one EST was a transcript of TTY4 gene, and the remaining 4 probably corresponded to 4 different pseudogenes; iii) DAZ gene(s) were expressed not only in testis, but also in lung carcinoma cells, stomach and Ewing's sarcoma cells; iv) beta-satellite clusters were present around and within the BPY2 and TTY4 gene region; v) In this study, TTY4, BPY2 and DAZ1 genes were mapped precisely to the AC010088 region.
Lowered POMC and heightened TRPV3 expressions in the HN and mNTS are involved in development of hyperphagia and obesity in OP rats.
Here, we have shown that it is applicable to 10 human colorectal carcinoma cell lines with a direct correlation between viral toxicity and CPG2 production.
Ten patients with colorectal carcinoma expressing carcinoembryonic antigen received antibody-directed enzyme prodrug therapy with A5B7 F(ab')2 antibody to carcinoembryonic antigen conjugated to carboxypeptidase G2 (CPG2).
Human tumor cell lines A2780, SK-OV-3 (ovarian adenocarcinomas), LS174T, and WiDr (colon carcinomas) were engineered to express constitutively either CPG2 or bacterial beta-galactosidase.
They have been used to treat mouse models of connective tissue disease such as lumican-null (Lum) and mucopolysaccharidosis (Gusb) mice.
Expression of fibromodulin was significantly higher in plaques obtained from patients with diabetes and a high fibromodulin expression was associated with a higher incidence of post-operative cerebrovascular events, whereas no such associations were seen for lumican.
This study aimed to identify which myometrial ECM components are affected by diabetes, including fibril-forming collagen types I, III and V, as well as proteoglycans, decorin, lumican, fibromodulin and biglycan.
Using the polymicrobial model of murine sepsis, we investigated the role of C5a receptors in septic lymphopenia.
In wild-type mice, cecal ligation and puncture resulted in splenocyte apoptosis and significant lymphopenia after 3 d, which was not observed in C5aR1(-/-) or C5aR2(-/-) mice.
NDT 9513727 effectively inhibited C5a-induced neutropenia in gerbil and cynomolgus macaque in vivo.
Nonetheless, topical application of C5aR antagonists produced circulating levels of the drugs that antagonized the LPS-induced systemic responses of neutropenia and hypotension.
Several of these antigens (CD2, CD25, CD35, CD88, CD203c) appear to be upregulated on MCs in patients with systemic mastocytosis and therefore are used as diagnostic markers.
This study analysed the expression of various complement-related cell surface antigens (CD11b/CR3, CD11c/CR4, CD35/CR1, CD55/DAF, CD59/MIRL, CD88/C5aR) on bone marrow mast cells (BMMC) in patients suffering from systemic mastocytosis (SM), other haematological diseases and non-haematological disorders (control groups).
A cyclic peptide, Phe-[Orn-Pro-D-Cyclohexylalanine-Trp-Arg] (F-[OPdChaWR]), was recently shown in vitro to antagonise the binding of C5a to its receptor (CD88) on human polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs) and in vivo to inhibit the neutropenia associated with septic shock induced by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) in rats.
Some in vivo activities of two complement C5a agonist analogues have been evaluated by measuring changes in blood pressure and neutropenia in the rat and comparing the results with their receptor affinities in peritoneal macrophages and polymorphonuclear leucocytes (PMNs).
The abnormal C5aR expression on eosinophils and neutrophils became normal after spontaneous resolution of symptoms and blood eosinophilia.
The therapeutic potential of DPPSC was tested in a wound healing mouse model and in two genetic mouse models of muscular dystrophy (Scid/mdx and Sgcb-null Rag2-null Gammac-null).
Mutations in the RAG1/RAG2 genes are associated with a broad spectrum of clinical phenotypes, ranging from severe combined immunodeficiency to various autoimmune diseases.
In this review, the molecular pathology of diseases caused by RAG1/RAG2 mutations, in particular Omenn syndrome, will be discussed.
Severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) is a potentially fatal primary immunodeficiency (PID) that is caused by mutations in genes such as IL2RG, JAK3, IL7RA, RAG1, RAG2, and ADA.
Severe combined immunodeficiency can be caused by loss-of-function mutations in genes involved in the DNA recombination machinery, such as recombination-activating gene 1 (RAG1), RAG2, or DNA cross-link repair 1C (DCLRE1C).
Seven of the 98 cases (7%) of carcinomas showed TLE-1 expression, including 1 each of prostate adenocarcinoma (ADCA), esophageal ADCA, basal cell carcinoma, adrenocortical carcinoma, endometrial ADCA, ovarian serous carcinoma, and small cell carcinoma.
Here, we evaluated the effects of 15d-PGJ2 alone and in combination with the tyrosine kinas inhibitor (TKI) dasatinib in uterine sarcoma cell lines (MES-SA, MES-SA/DX5 and SKN).
Previous studies have shown that N(1),N(12)-bis(all-trans-retinoyl)spermine (RASP), a retinoid analog, inhibits RNase P activity and angiogenesis in the chicken embryo chorioallantoic membrane, demonstrates anti-tumor activity on prostate cancer cells, and acts as anti-inflammatory agent, being more effective and less toxic than all-trans retinoic acid.
These results suggest RASP, as a promising lead compound for the treatment of several dermatological disorders and certain cancer types, has apparently minimal toxic side-effects as revealed in this two-generation reproduction study in rats.
To determine the functional significance of Hhat expression in breast cancer, we used a panel of breast cancer cell lines that included estrogen receptor (ER) positive, HER2 amplified, triple negative, and tamoxifen resistant cells.
Depletion of Hhat decreased anchorage-dependent and anchorage-independent proliferation of ER positive, but not triple negative, breast cancer cells.
These data suggest that Hhat plays a critical role in ER positive, HER2 amplified, and hormone resistant breast cancer proliferation and highlights the potential promise of Hhat inhibitors for therapeutic benefit in breast cancer.
Hedgehog acyltransferase (HHAT) is the enzyme in the endoplasmic reticulum that palmitoylates Hedgehog proteins, is a member of a small subfamily of membrane-bound O-acyltransferase proteins that acylate secreted proteins, and is an important drug target in cancer.
The STARD3 gene belongs to the minimal amplicon in HER2-positive breast cancers and encodes a cholesterol-binding membrane protein.
To study how elevated StAR-related lipid transfer protein 3 (StARD3) expression affects breast cancer cells, we generated MCF-7 cells stably overexpressing StARD3-green fluorescent protein.
In two Finnish nationwide patient cohorts, approximately 10% (212/2220) breast cancers exhibited high StARD3 protein levels, which was strongly associated with HER2 amplification; several factors related to poor disease outcome and poor breast cancer-specific survival.
In addition, high StARD3 levels in breast cancers were associated with elevated 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase mRNA levels and anti-Src-Tyr416 immunoreactivity.
These results provide evidence that StARD3 overexpression results in increased cholesterol biosynthesis and Src kinase activity in breast cancer cells and suggest that elevated StARD3 expression may contribute to breast cancer aggressiveness by increasing membrane cholesterol and enhancing oncogenic signaling.
In addition it will discuss the clinical and biological implications of the amplification of ten other genes at this locus (MED1, STARD3, GRB7, THRA, RARA, IGFPB4, CCR7, KRT20, KRT19 and GAST) in breast cancer.
Using a quantitative polymerase chain reaction method and DNA extracted from frozen tumor specimens, 11 genes (MED1, STARD3, HER2, GRB7, THRA, RARA, TOP2A, IGFBP4, CCR7, KRT20, KRT19 and GAS), which are localized within Chr17q12-q21 and have a putative role in breast cancer development, were quantified.
The metastatic lymph node 64 (MLN64) gene was initially identified as highly expressed in the metastatic lymph node from breast cancer.
However, the role played by MLN64 in breast cancer remains unclear.
In the present study, the expression of MLN64 was examined in a breast cancer cohort using quantitative real-time PCR and immunohistochemical staining.
A panel of breast cancer cell sublines was subsequently developed by knockdown of MLN64 expression.
In conclusion, MLN64 is overexpressed in breast cancer, and its level correlates with poor prognosis and patient survival.
MLN64 contributes to the development and progression of breast cancer through the regulation of cell proliferation and adhesive capacity.
STARD3 and RARA also hold clinical relevance, the former having been shown to function in steroidogenesis and therefore implicated in hormone-receptor-positive breast cancer.
We used a genetic association study design to determine if common genetic variation (frequency&gt;or=5%) in a 400-kb region surrounding ERBB2 and containing the PPARBP, CRK7, NEUROD2, PPP1R1B, STARD3, TCAP, PNMT, CAB2, ERBB2, C17ORF37, GRB7 and ZNFN1A3 genes, was associated with breast cancer risk.
The applicability of salivary Beta -hexosaminidase (Beta-HEX A%, percentage of Beta-HEX A isoenzyme to total Beta-HEX) and Beta-HEX B% (Beta-HEX B/Beta-HEX) indexes was investigated as a possible marker of periodontitis.
Salivary Beta-HEX A% is a promising excellent marker for the diagnosis of periodontitis.
To evaluate the prognostic impact of gene expression levels (ELs) of two tumor suppressor genes, sprouty 4 (SPRY4, located on 5q) and lysine methyltransferase 2C (KMT2C, located on 7q) in correlation with clinical characteristics and genetic abnormalities assessed at initial diagnosis in acute myeloid leukemia (AML).
As a well-defined antagonist in FGFR2-induced RAS/ERK activation, ectopic expression of sprouty (SPRY) family was reported in several kinds of cancers except gastric cancer.
Sprouty proteins are modulators of mitogeninduced signal transduction processes and therefore can influence the process of cancerogenesis.
The encoded protein of Sprouty homolog 4 (SPRY4) is associated with various human cancers.
We show that these retained super-enhancers are essential for rhabdoid tumor survival, including some that are shared by all subtypes, such as SPRY1, and other lineage-specific super-enhancers, such as SOX2 in brain-derived rhabdoid tumors.
As a member of the Sprouty family, Sprouty4 has been previously shown to function as a tumour suppressor in lung and breast cancer.
In this issue of Blood, Dietrich et al make the first observation of the presence of deleterious CDKN1B mutation in 16% of patients with hairy cell leukemia (HCL).
We previously found that global CypD knockout mice (KO) are protected from diet-induced glucose intolerance; however, the tissue-specific function of CypD and mPTP, particularly in the control of glucose homeostasis, has not been ascertained.
Mice lacking CypD were protected from high fat diet-induced glucose intolerance due to increased glucose uptake in skeletal muscle.
Adult CypD(-/-) developed hyperglycemia, insulin resistance and glucose intolerance albeit resistant to DIO.
von Willebrand factor (VWF) is an independent risk factor for adverse events in patients with non-valvular atrial fibrillation (NVAF).
Higher VWF level correlated with higher CHADS2 scores and with progressing intensity of blood stasis in the left atrium and thrombus formation in all three time periods of atrial fibrillation duration.
Patients with atrial fibrillation (AF) exhibit higher plasma vWF and lower ADAMTS13 levels.
In a multicenter case-control association study, we studied the SNPs rs11136000 (clusterin, CLU), rs541458 (phosphatidylinositol binding clatrin assembly protein, PICALM), and rs1554948 (transcription factor A, and tyrosine kinase, non-receptor, 1, TNK1) according to the three age groups 50-65 years (group 1), 66-80 years (group 2), and 80+ years (group 3) in 569 older subjects without cognitive impairment (NoCI) and 520 Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients.
To study the association of apolipoprotein E (APOE), Clusterin (CLU) and phosphatidylinositol binding clathrin assembly protein (PICALM) polymorphisms in Alzheimer's disease (AD) subjects compared to cognitively normal control subjects in an Indian population.
Genome-wide association studies and meta-analyses implicated that increased risk of developing Alzheimer's diseases (AD) has been associated with the ABCA7, APOE, BIN1, CASS4, CD2AP, CD33, CELF1, CLU, CR1, DSG2, EPHA1, FERMT2, HLA-DRB1, HLA-DRB4, INPP5D, MEF2C, MS4A4A, MS4A4E, MS4A6E, NME8, PICALM, PLD3, PTK2B, RIN3, SLC24A4, SORL1, and ZCWPW1 genes.
The PICALM rs541458 T allele has been recognized as a risk factor for late-onset Alzheimer's disease, and age might modulate the effects that genetic factors have on cognitive functions and brain.
The association of variants in CLU, CR1, PICALM, BIN1, ABCA7, and CD33 genes with late-onset Alzheimer's disease (LOAD) was evaluated and confirmed through genome-wide association study.
In vivo, depletion of GDF-15 in Ras-driven tumor xenografts and in an orthotopic model of pancreatic cancer delayed tumor development.
Further, production of GDF-15 is directly regulated by NF-KB, and the colocalization of activated NF-KB and GDF-15 in epithelial ducts of human pancreatic adenocarcinoma supports the importance of this observation.
The present study investigated the association between cancer-associated weight loss and plasma GDF-15 concentration, as well as other biomarkers, in patients with metastatic lung or exocrine pancreatic cancer.
In pancreatic cancer patients, no association between GDF-15 levels and weight loss was identified.
The aim of the present case-control study was to compare the diagnostic value of ULBP2, MIC-1 and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9) in 359 serum samples, consisting of 152 cases of PC, 20 cases of pre-pancreatic cancer, 91 cases of chronic pancreatitis (CP) and 96 normal controls (NC).
Macrophage inhibitory cytokine 1 (MIC-1/GDF15) has been identified as a potential novel biomarker for detection of pancreatic cancer (PCa).
However, the diagnostic value of serum MIC-1 for pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), particularly for those at the early stage, and the value for treatment response monitoring have not yet been investigated.
CD30 ligand/TNFSF8, chordin-like 2, FGF-10/KGF-2, growth/differentiation factor 15, I-TAC/CXCL11, OSM, and SCF might represent as predictive biomarkers for gemcitabine and erlotinib response of patients with pancreatic cancer.
Radiologists evaluated following CT findings: maximum tumor diameter, percentage of solid component (%solid), air bronchogram, spiculation, adjacency of bullae or interstitial pneumonia (IP) around the tumor, notch, and pleural indent.
The results strongly suggest that electronic self-auscultation at a single location (suprasternal notch) can support diagnosis of pneumonia in patients with COPD.
We compared patients who underwent PAO for the treatment of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease hip dysplasia (CMTHD group) with patients who underwent PAO for treatment of hip dysplasia secondary to DDH in terms of (1) modified Harris Hip scores; (2) radiographic correction of acetabular dysplasia; and (3) the rate of complications.
Twenty-seven subjects with Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease who underwent a PAO between January 1991 and December 2010 were matched to 54 subjects with DDH on the basis of sex, age, date of surgery, and body mass index.
The purpose of this study is to evaluate the use of the Dega osteotomy in the treatment of hip pathology resulting from both developmental dysplasia (DDH) and neuromuscular disease (NM).
Neuromuscular dysplasia of the hip (NDH) is a sequel of neuromuscular disease, and generally presents later in childhood than DDH.
To explore this suggestion we ascertained the presence of neuromuscular disease within a cohort of DDH patients, and asked whether the neuromuscular condition is the initial etiology of the dysplasia or a coincidental finding.
We examined 45 infants with nondevelopmental dysplasia of the hip (non-DDH), including congenital deficiency of the femur (CDF) (20 infants), neuromuscular syndrome (five infants), skeletal dysplasia (15 infants), and infection (five infants), and present the sonographic findings.
In previous studies, we demonstrated that human RHBDD2 is over-expressed in the advanced stages of breast and colorectal cancers, suggesting a favorable role in cell proliferation.
So far little is known about the expression of RHBDD2 in other tissues and other species, and because of similarities between cancer and embryonic cells, this study focused on the evaluation of Rhbdd2 expression in embryonic and adult rat tissues.
Quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis showed a significant RHBDD2 mRNA overexpression in advanced breast cancer compared with normal tissue samples (p = 0.012).
Immunohistochemistry analysis showed a significant increase of RHBDD2 protein expression in association with breast cancer samples negative for progesterone receptor (p = 0.015).
Rhomboid domain containing 2 (RHBDD2) was previously observed overexpressed and amplified in breast cancer samples.
In order to identify biological pathways modulated by RHBDD2, gene expression profiles of RHBDD2 silenced breast cancer cells were analyzed using whole genome human microarray.
We used a lentivirus-based approach for stable silencing of RHBDD2 mRNA in the T47D breast cancer cell line, and we examined the transcriptional consequences on UPR genes as well as the phenotypic effects on migration and proliferation processes.
Based on these studies, we hypothesize that RHBDD2 overexpression in breast cancer could represent an adaptive phenotype to the stressful tumor microenvironment by modulating the ER stress response.
In previous studies, we identified rhomboid domain containing 2 (RHBDD2) gene to be markedly overexpressed in breast cancer patients that developed recurrence of the disease.
In this study, we evaluated for the first time RHBDD2 gene expression in colorectal cancer (CRC).
Overall, these results showed that RHBDD2 overexpression might play a role in colorectal cancer progression.
In the course of breast cancer global gene expression studies, we identified an uncharacterized gene known as RHBDD2 (Rhomboid domain containing 2) to be markedly over-expressed in primary tumors from patients with recurrent disease.
