Our results demonstrated that hsa-miR-483-5p, hsa-miR-675, hsa-miR-139-3p, hsa-miR-598, hsa-miR-625 and hsa-miR-187 could serve as prognostic and predictive markers for survival of BDC patients and could potentially be provided as targets for future therapy.
Targeting the centromeres of chromosomes 3, 7, 17 (CEP3, 7, 17) and the 9p21-locus (LSI9p21) for diagnosing bladder cancer (BC) is time- and cost-intensive and requires a manual investigation of the sample by a well-trained investigator thus overall limiting its use in clinical diagnostics and large-scaled epidemiological studies.
Ossification of the ligamentum flavum (OLF) causing compressive cervical myelopathy or radiculopathy is rare.
However, thoracic OLF rarely causes radiculopathy.
We report a rare case of thoracic radiculopathy caused by OLF.
Thoracic radiculopathy caused by OLF was suspected.
Thoracic OLF rarely causes radiculopathy, but it should be considered as a differential diagnosis of thoracic radicular pain.
OLF should be kept in mind if a patient presents with radiculopathy, particularly in the cervical region, for which surgical intervention is contemplated.
Radiculopathy resulting from ossification of the ligamentum flavum (OLF) is extremely rare and concerns only intercostal neuralgias.
We describe a 37-year-old Caucasian woman with a lumbar radiculopathy revealing an OLF.
Pancreatitis was induced in C57Bl/6 wild-type (control), cathepsin B-knockout, and cathepsin L-knockout mice by partial pancreatic duct ligation with supramaximal caerulein injection, or by repetitive supramaximal caerulein injections alone.
Trypsinogen became activated in macrophages cultured with purified trypsinogen or co-cultured with pancreatic acini and in pancreata of mice with pancreatitis; trypsinogen activation required macrophage endocytosis and expression and activity of cathepsin B, and was sensitive to pH.
Activation of trypsinogen in macrophages resulted in translocation of NF-kB and production of inflammatory cytokines; mice without trypsinogen activation (cathepsin B-knockout mice) in macrophages developed less severe pancreatitis compared with control mice.
Transfer of macrophage from control mice to cathepsin B-knockout mice increased the severity of pancreatitis.
Experimental studies in acute pancreatitis (AP) suggest a strong association of acinar cell injury with cathepsin B-dependent intracellular activation of trypsin.
Pancreas, lung, and serum was harvested up to 48 h after pancreatitis induction and used for histopathology, amylase, lipase, cathepsin B, trypsin, and elastase activity measurements, myeloperoxidase (MPO) content and cytokine concentrations.
In taurocholate-pancreatitis AZD8309 reduced cathepsin B activity and MPO.
The lysosomal hydrolase cathepsin B (CTSB) is a known activator of trypsinogen, and its deletion reduces disease severity in experimental pancreatitis.
In summary, CTSB in pancreatitis undergoes activation in a secretory, vesicular, and acidic compartment where it activates trypsinogen.
C3F was also significantly increased in 20 chronic renal failure (CRF) patients as compared to 196 controls; this would support the existence of functional differences between C3F and C3S alleles.
Ectopic expression of Fgfr2c, a gene implicated in craniosynostosis in mice and humans, and that of Runx2 was detected within the affected sutures of Bcl11b(-/-) mice.
These data suggest that ectopic expression of Fgfr2c in the sutural mesenchyme, without concomitant changes in the expression of FGF ligands, appears to induce the RUNX2-dependent osteogenic program and craniosynostosis in Bcl11b(-/-) mice.
(2) An analysis of all published HLA data for patients of European origin indicated a weak association of pernicious anemia with HLA-B7.
Specifically, studies have demonstrated miR-221/-222 function as oncogenes, and promote PCa cell proliferation and the development of castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC).
SOCS3 was found significantly declined, while microRNA-221 (miR-221) obviously up-regulated in bladder cancer tissue.
This study investigated the role of miR-221 in regulating SOCS3/JAK-STAT3 signaling pathway and bladder cancer cell proliferation and apoptosis.
Bladder cancer tumor tissue and para-carcinoma tissue were collected from patients to test miR-221 and SOCS3 expressions.
MiR-221 significantly increased, while SOCS3 obviously reduced in bladder cancer tissue compared with para-carcinoma tissue.
MiR-221 elevated, while SOCS3 reduced in bladder cancer tissue.
As miR-221 targets several regulators of the PI3K-AKT-mTOR pathway and a link between this pathway and CD44 has been previously shown in prostate cancer, we considered miR-221 regulation of CD44 may be through this pathway.
The aim of our study was to evaluate the relationship of TMPRSS2-ERG fusion gene status, tumor tissue prostate-specific antigen (PSA), prostate cancer antigen 3 (PCA3), miR-23b, miR-26a and miR-221 expression levels in combination with preoperative serum PSA level to the risk of PCa recurrence after radical prostatectomy.
2', 5'-Oligoadenylate synthetase-lilke (OASL) protein is an atypical oligoadenylate synthetase (OAS) family member, which possesses antiviral activity but lacks 2', 5'-oligoadenylate synthetase activity.
Here, a novel variant of porcine OASL (pOASL2) was identified through RT-PCR amplification.
This gene is distinguishable from the previously described wild-type porcine OASL (pOASL1).
The gene appears to be derived from a truncation of exon 4 plus 8 nucleotides of exon 5 with a premature termination, measuring only 633 bp in length, although its position corresponds to that of pOASL1.
Given this novel gene appears to be a variant of pOASL, we assayed for antiviral activity of the protein.
We demonstrated that pOASL2 could inhibit Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) proliferation as well as pOASL1 in a transient overexpression assay of pOASL1 and pOASL2 in PK-15 and Vero cells.
In addition to JEV, pOASL1 and pOASL2 also decreased the proliferations of Porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus (PRRSV) and vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV), but did not exhibit antiviral activity against pseudorabies virus (PRV).
Structural analysis showed that the pOASL2 gene retained only the first three exons at the 5'-.
To investigate the role of the AlfaN4 helix in pOASL in antiviral responses like that in hOASL, we mutated key residues in the anchor domain of the AlfaN4 helix in pOASL2, based on the domain's location in hOASL.
However, the antiviral activity of pOASL2 was not affected.
Thus, the AlfaN4 helix of pOASL likely does not play a significant role in its antiviral activity.
In conclusion, pOASL2 acts as a new splice isoform of pOASL that plays a role in resistance to infection of several kinds of RNA viruses.
Only 5 genes were significantly up-regulated in MS patients vs control subjects; namely TNF-AIP6, IL-1RA, OASL, CLC and DOCK4 (p &lt; 0.05).
Analysis of the effector molecules of the up-regulated genes revealed that 83 MS patients had positive serum level of OASL, 87 MS patients had positive serum levels of IL-1RA, and none of the 88 MS patients showed detectable serum levels of TNF-AIP6, CLC or DOCK4.
OASL and IL-1RA genes were strongly expressed in MS patients and that their effector molecules may be considered as biomarkers associated with the inflammatory process of the disease and possibly treatment response.
However, IRF1, IFNK and viral restriction factors (IFIT1, 2, 3, 5, OASL, CD74, RTP4) were up-regulated.
The signature's genes are: Interferon Stimulated Gene 15 (ISG15), Interleukin 16 (IL16), 2',5'-Oligoadenylate Synthetase Like (OASL), and Adhesion G Protein Coupled Receptor E5 (ADGRE5).
Previous work has identified that following viral infection, type I IFN signaling induces the production of the 2'-5'-oligoadenylate synthetase (OAS) family, which include OAS1, OAS2, OAS3, and OAS-like (OASL) protein.
OASL was identified to be strongly induced following viral infection through engaging the RNA sensor RIG-I and increasing signaling through this pathway to enhance the anti-viral type I IFN response.
Surprisingly, infection with viral dsDNA revealed an IFN inhibitory role and therefore pro-viral function of OASL through the inhibition of the cGAS cytosolic DNA sensing mechanism.
Intracellular bacteria are able to activate the cytosolic DNA sensing pathway, however the role of OASL during bacterial infection is largely unknown.
Vacuolar pathogenic microbes such as mycobacteria induce OASL early post infection, where it functions in a prosurvival fashion by inhibiting autophagic mechanisms and antimicrobial peptide expression.
This suggests an underestimated role of OASL in the innate immune response to infection with a variety of pathogens and points to OASL-associated modulation of the type I IFN response.
OASL may therefore play a critical role in defining the outcome of infection.
We earlier nominated 16 genes (IRF7, IFIT1, IFIT5, OASL, CLC, GBP-1, PSMB9, HERC5, CCR1, CD36, MS4A4A, BIRC4BP, PLSCR1, DEFA1/DEFA3, DEFA4, and COL9A2) as predictors of response to remission induction therapy against MPA.
The 2'5'-oligoadenylate synthetase (OAS) is an interferon (IFN)-induced protein that plays an important role in the antiviral action of IFN, with OAS3 being one of the four OAS classes (OAS1, OAS2, OAS3, OASL).
In a pooled analysis of 105 candidate genes and two genome-wide association studies, we observed associations of single nucleotide polymorphisms from nine genes (EIF2AK2, IFNAR2, ITPA, MBL2, MX1, OASL, SPP1, TGFB1, TNK2) with response to interferon-based therapy.
Single nucleotide polymorphisms in the OAS1 (rs1131476), OAS2 (rs1293747), OAS3 (rs2072136), OASL (rs10849829) and IL28B (rs12979860, rs12980275 and rs8099917) genes were studied to examine their associations with responses to IFN treatment in paediatric patients.
The association analysis for CR showed that the TT genotype of IL28B rs12979860 was present only in the no-CR group (P = 0.033) and the AA genotype of OASL rs10849829 was significantly more frequent in the no-CR group (P = 0.044, OR = 0.26, 95%CI: 0.07-0.88).
The aim of the present study was to evaluate agreement between three pairs formed by one of three mania scales (Young Mania Rating Scale [YMRS], Bech-Rafaelsen Mania Scale [BRMS], or the Clinician-Administered Rating Scale for Mania [CARS-M]) and a single depression scale (21-item Hamilton Depression Rating Scale [21-HAM-D]) for evaluation of response to mood stabilizers in patients with mixed bipolar disorder.
The present study suggests that any one of the three tested mania rating scales (YMRS, BRMS, and CARS-M) can be combined with the 21-HAM-D to assess treatment response in patients with mixed bipolar disorder.
Older adults and patients with dementia often have disrupted circadian activity rhythms (CARs).
Clinically, decreased levels of cGAS are associated with poor prognosis for patients with breast cancer harbouring high levels of miR-25/93.
In our analysis, we found that increased expression of 12 mature miRNAs-hsa-miR-320a, hsa-miR-361-5p, hsa-miR-103a-3p, hsa-miR-21-5p, hsa-miR-374b-5p, hsa-miR-140-3p, hsa-miR-25-3p, hsa-miR-651-5p, hsa-miR-200c-3p, hsa-miR-30a-5p, hsa-miR-30c-5p, and hsa-let-7i-5p -each predicted improved breast cancer survival.
Here, we report a novel function of isoliquiritigenin (ISL) as a natural inhibitor of autophagy-related miR-25 in killing drug-resistant breast cancer cells.
Overall, our results not only indicate that ISL acts as a natural autophagy inducer to increase breast cancer chemosensitivity, but also reveal that miR-25 functions as a novel regulator of autophagy by targeting ULK1.
Expression of a panel of seven microRNAs (hsa-miR-34a, hsa-miR-16, hsa-miR-17, hsa-miR-21, hsa-miR-221, hsa-miR-326, and hsa-miR-375) and seven target genes ( E2F3, PI3KCA, TOM34, WNT5A, PDCD4, DFFA, and EGFR) in 43 glioblastoma multiforme specimens were profiled compared to non-cancer tissues via quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction.
The present study examined whether it could be possible to quantify the expression of TOMM34 and RNF43 in colorectal cancer and liver metastasis samples prepared from paraffin blocks.
Quantification of TOMM34 and RNF43 gene expression in several-year-old paraffin-embedded colorectal cancer specimens was possible by qPCR using the Universal ProbeLibrary.
The mRNA levels of seven TAAs, Wilms' tumor gene (WT1), kinetochore associated-2 (KNTC2), cell division cycle associated-1 (CDCA1), M phase phosphoprotein-1 (MPHOSPH1), DEP domain-containing 1 (DEPDC1), 34-kDa translocase of the outer mitochondrial membrane (TOMM34) and ring finger protein-43 (RNF43), were analyzed using quantitative real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction, and their relationships with clinicopathological factors and the cell cycle were analyzed.
These antigenic peptides were derived from 5 proteins identified as cancer-testis antigens(ring finger protein 43 [RNF43], translocase of outer mitochondrial membrane 34[TOMM34], maternal embryonic leucine zipper kinase[MELK], forkhead box M1[FOXM1], and holliday junction recognition protein[HJURP])and 2 vascular endothelial growth factor receptors(VEGFR1 and VEGFR2).
To evaluate the safety of combination vaccine treatment of multiple peptides, phase I clinical trial was conducted for patients with advanced colorectal cancer using five novel HLA-A*2402-restricted peptides, three peptides derived from oncoantigens, ring finger protein 43 (RNF43), 34 kDa-translocase of the outer mitochondrial membrane (TOMM34), and insulin-like growth factor-II mRNA binding protein 3 (KOC1), and the remaining two from angiogenesis factors, vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 1 (VEGFR1) and VEGFR2.
These antigenic peptides were derived from 2 different cancer-testis antigens, ring finger protein 43 (RNF43) and translocase of outer mitochondrial membrane 34( TOMM34).
We conducted a clinical trial of colorectal cancer-specific peptide( RNF43, TOMM34) vaccines with uracil/tegafur( UFT)+Leucovorin( LV) for the treatment of advanced or recurrent colorectal cancer.
We started a clinical trial of vaccines against multiple peptides (RNF43, TOMM34, forkhead box protein M1 [FOXM1], maternal embryonic leucine zipper kinase [MELK], holliday junction recognition protein[HJURP], vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 1[VEGFR1], and VEGFR2) for the treatment of advanced or recurrent colorectal cancer.
Recently, analysis of tumor antigens using micro-arrays has revealed upregulation             of cancer-testis antigens RNF43 and TOMM34 and vascular endothelial growth factor             receptors VEGFR1 and VEGFR2 in colorectal cancer.
Our aim was to analyze the dynamic modulation, determined by ADT, of the expression of selected genes involved in the pathogenesis and progression of prostate cancer (TMPRSS2:ERG, WNT11, SPINK1, CHGA, AR, and SPDEF) using real-time polymerase chain reaction in a series of 59 surgical samples of prostate carcinomas, including 37 cases preoperatively treated with ADT and 22 untreated cases, and in 43 corresponding biopsies.
However, Wnt-11 expression in cervical cancer has not been well investigated.
Wnt-11 and HR-HPV E6 expression increased in a manner that corresponded with the progression of cervical cancer and was significantly correlated with the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics cancer stage, lymph node metastasis, tumor size, and HPV infection.
Wnt-11 protein expression was positively associated with HR-HPV E6 protein expression in all 78 cervical cancer samples (P &lt; 0.001).
Furthermore, Wnt-11 was positively associated with P-JNK1 expression and promoted cervical cancer cell proliferation and invasion.
These observations suggest that the increased Wnt-11 expression observed in cervical cancer cells may lead to the phosphorylation and activation of JNK-1 and significantly promote tumor cell proliferation and cell migration/invasion through activation of the Wnt/JNK pathway.
Consequently, Wnt-11 may serve as a novel target for cervical cancer therapy.
In this study, we aimed to explore the association among gene variants of five cytokines, tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-Alfa), transforming growth factor beta-1 (TGF-Beta1), interferon gamma (IFN-Gamma), interleukin-6 (IL-6), and interleukin-10 (IL-10), and clinical parameters and prognosis in patients with multiple myeloma (MM) treated with novel therapeutic drugs in Turkish population for the first time except TNF-Alfa.
Using absolute value of log2 fold-change &gt; 2 or extremely small P value (10-20) as a criterion, we identified nine significant genes (HBA1, HBB, HIST1H2AC, GSTT1, MYL7, NPPA, NPPB, PDK4, PLA2G2A) in LVH, also found in published data set for ischemic and dilated cardiomyopathy in heart failure.
Tolerized cow's milk protein (CMP)-sensitive atopic dermatitis had, in particular, decreased kappa-casein-specific IgG(1) levels, compared with clinically reactive patients.
Tolerised patients, particularly those with atopic dermatitis, had decreased responses to kappa-casein which were restored after Treg depletion.
A markedly decreased proliferative response to kappa-casein in tolerised IgE-mediated CMA patients with atopic dermatitis, which was abrogated by Treg depletion, suggested a role for kappa-casein in tolerance induction.
In order to investigate the role of food antigen-specific T cells circulating in the blood of patients with food allergy, we compared T cell response to three casein components (alpha s-, beta- and, kappa-casein) with specificities of IgG and IgE binding to the casein components in four milk-allergic patients (P1-4) with atopic dermatitis.
Studies have identified that PKM2 is related to the development of glucose intolerance and insulin resistance in rodents and humans.
Mechanistically, we showed that hyperglycemia and diabetes decreased PKM2 tetramer formation and activity by sulfenylation in mouse glomeruli and cultured podocytes.
Podocyte-specific Pkm2-knockout (KO) mice with diabetes developed worse albuminuria and glomerular pathology.
Conversely, we found that pharmacological activation of PKM2 by a small-molecule PKM2 activator, TEPP-46, reversed hyperglycemia-induced elevation in toxic glucose metabolites and mitochondrial dysfunction, partially by increasing glycolytic flux and PGC-1Alfa mRNA in cultured podocytes.
To identify the miR-155 targets relevant for B-cell lymphoma, we performed RNA immunoprecipitation of Argonaute 2 in Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) cells upon miR-155 inhibition and in BL cells upon ectopic expression of miR-155.
Further research suggested that METTL13 negatively regulates cell proliferation in bladder cancer and reinstates G1/S checkpoint via the coordinated downregulation of CDK6, CDK4 and CCND1, decreased phosphorylation of Rb and subsequent delayed cell cycle progression.
miR-29c could inhibit the proliferation, migration and invasion of bladder cancer cells via regulating CDK6.
p34cdc2, collapsin response mediator protein 4 (CRMP4), doublecortin (DCX), HuD, and NeuN expression was assessed in tuber (n = 16) and subependymal giant cell astrocytoma (SEGA; n = 6) specimens in tuberous sclerosis complex to define the developmental phenotype and lineage of giant cells (CGs) in these lesions.
First, logistic regression analysis in two human prostate gene expression datasets revealed that expression levels of five genes (CXCL14, ITGAX, LPCAT2, RNASEH2A, and ZNF322) were positively correlated with aggressive prostate cancer and two genes (CCL19 and HIST1H1A) were protective for aggressive prostate cancer.
Second generation H1 antihistamines (H1A) are currently recommended as first choice medications for allergic rhinitis and rhinoconjunctivitis.
Consecutive patients suffering from allergic rhinitis or rhinoconjunctivitis were included and followed prospectively for 30 days from the prescription of a second generation H1A in monotherapy.
Antibody 3.1 potently neutralizes influenza viruses from the H1a clade (i.e., H1, H2, H5, H6) but has little neutralizing activity against the H1b clade.
We have overexpressed OTX2 in retinal pigmented epithelial cells before their transplantation in the eye of a model of retinitis pigmentosa carrying a mutation in Mertk, a gene specifically expressed by retinal pigmented epithelial cells.
Transplantation of OTX2-genetically modified cells may be medically effective for other retinal diseases involving the retinal pigmented epithelium as age-related macular degeneration.
Therapeutic restoration of OTX2 expression might help revive RPE and visual function in retinal diseases such as AMD.
The retinal disease resembles conditional mice models that show slow photoreceptor degeneration secondary to loss of Otx2 function in the adult RPE.
When the beads were coated with amelogenin gene splice products (A+4 or A-4), the expression of osteo-chondrogenic markers (RP59, Sox9, or BSP) was also observed.
This study has provided evidence that the regulation of the SVCT2 transporter plays an important role not only in T1D osteoporosis but also in other oxidative stress-related musculoskeletal complications.
Autosomal recessive HMG-CoA synthase deficiency (HMGCS2D) is characterized by hypoketotic hypoglycemia, vomiting, lethargy, and hepatomegaly after periods of prolonged fasting or illness.
Most frequent disease presentation in our patients was characterized with early and prominent oromandibular dystonia (OMD), followed by severe generalized dystonia and early loss of mobility within the first five years of prolonged disease duration (18.7 +/- 10.0 years).
Eight out of 9 patients reached 7 significant clinical milestones (OMD, generalized dystonia, dysarthria, dysphagia, postural instability, gait difficulties, ADL dependency) in the first 4.6 years of disease course.
A smoothelin-deficient mouse model may help to establish the role of smoothelin-A in intestinal contraction and provide a model for myogenic chronic intestinal pseudo-obstruction.
The pathology of mice lacking smoothelin-A is reminiscent of that seen in patients with chronic intestinal pseudo-obstruction.
Hereditary tyrosinemia type 1 (HT1) is characterized by severe progressive liver disease and renal tubular dysfunction.
If left untreated this deficiency of functional FAH leads to a buildup of toxic metabolites that can cause liver disease, kidney dysfunction and high mortality.
In this study, we investigated whether fumarylacetoacetate hydrolase deficient (FAH-/-) pigs, a novel large-animal model of HT1, develop fibrosis and cirrhosis characteristic of the human disease.
Under conditions of low-dose NTBC, FAH-/- pigs developed liver fibrosis and portal hypertension, and thus may serve as a large-animal model of chronic liver disease.
Fah-deficient mice and pigs are phenotypically analogous to human HT1, but do not recapitulate all the chronic features of the human disorder, especially liver fibrosis and cirrhosis.
More importantly, the Fah(-/-) rats developed remarkable liver fibrosis and cirrhosis, which have not been observed in Fah mutant mice or pigs.
Moreover, the highly efficient repopulation of hepatocytes in Fah(-/-) livers prevented the progression of liver fibrosis to cirrhosis and in turn restored liver architecture.
These results indicate that Fah(-/-) rats may be used as an animal model of HT1 with liver cirrhosis.
Recent GWAS completed for three types of common adult-onset glaucoma have identified novel loci for POAG (primary-open-angle glaucoma) (ABCA1, AFAP1, GMDS, PMM2, TGFBR3, FNDC3B, ARHGEF12, GAS7, FOXC1, ATXN2, TXNRD2); PACG (primary angle-closure glaucoma (EPDR1, CHAT, GLIS3, FERMT2, DPM2-FAM102); and exfoliation syndrome (XFS) glaucoma (CACNA1A).
Recently, a genome-wide association study identified genetic variations in ITGA4 and HLA-DRB1 that affect the LMR levels and were widely believed to be susceptibility genes for autoimmune diseases, including rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
To evaluate serum levels of fractalkine (FKN), a mediator of leukocyte transmigration, C-reactive protein (CRP) and expression of integrins CD11a and CD49d on peripheral blood lymphocytes in systemic sclerosis (SSc) and to investigate whether they are modulated by intravenous prostaglandin E1 (PGE1).
Prostaglandin E1 down-regulates serum fractalkine level, as well as CD11a and CD49d expression on peripheral blood lymphocytes, which suggests additional mechanisms in which this vasodilatatory agent exerts its efficacy in systemic sclerosis.
MR-1S directly phosphorylates and activates the MEK-ERK-RSK pathway to accelerate cancer growth and facilitates metastasis by activating the MLC2-FAK-AKT pathway.
After overexpressing TMEM17, levels of p-ERK and its downstream molecules, p-P90RSK and Snail, were down-regulated, while levels of Occludin and Zo-1 were up-regulated, which result in the inhibition of invasion and migration ability of lung cancer cells.
Herein, to understand the underlying relationship between obesity and brain tumors, we investigated the effect of leptin, alone or in combination with sPLA2-IIA on astrocytoma cell functions.
PLA2g2a was elevated with hypothyroidism and high fat diets which may contribute to the low grade inflammation associated with hypothyroidism and diet induced obesity.
There were significant correlations between age, visceral obesity, MPO, sPLA2, and SAA (r = 0.43; p = 0.00; r = 0.30; p = 0.00; r = 0.28; p = 0.00 and r = 0.53; p = 0.00).
We suggest that pla2g2a may have a causal relationship with chronic adiposity and metabolic syndrome and that its inhibition in vivo may be a valuable new approach to treat obesity, type 2 diabetes, and metabolic dysfunction in humans.
Trypanosoma brucei, protozoan parasites that cause human African trypanosomiasis (HAT), depend on ornithine uptake and metabolism by ornithine decarboxylase (ODC) for survival.
Furthermore, the molecular dynamics simulation work reveals that ZINC67909154 could be a potent inhibitor and this compound can be used to combat VL disease Conclusion: This study concludes that ZINC67909154 has the great potential to inhibit L. donovani ODC and would add to the drug discovery process against visceral leishmaniasis.
arginase (ARG), ornithine decarboxylase (ODC), S-adenosylmethionine decarboxylase (AdoMetDC), spermidine synthase (SpdS), trypanothione synthetase (TryS or TSA), trypanothione reductase (TryR or TR), tryparedoxin peroxidase (TXNPx), deoxyhypusine synthase (DHS) and deoxyhypusine hydroxylase (DOHH) are promising targets for the development of new drugs against leishmaniasis.
The plasma levels of arginase I, ornithine decarboxylase (ODC), transforming growth factor Beta (TGF-Beta), and prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) were higher in patients with DCL, compared with patients with localized cutaneous leishmaniasis (LCL) or with controls from an area of endemicity.
Immunohistochemistry confirmed that arginase I, ODC, and cyclooxygenase2 expression was higher in lesion biopsy specimens from patients with DCL than in those from patients with LCL.
Our data implicate arginase I, ODC, PGE2, and TGF-Beta in the failure to mount an efficient immune response and suggest perspectives in the development of new strategies for therapeutic intervention for patients with DCL.
The active form of vitamin B6, pyridoxal 5-phosphate, is, besides its antioxidative properties, a cofactor for a variety of essential enzymes present in the malaria parasite which includes the ornithine decarboxylase (ODC, synthesis of polyamines), the aspartate aminotransferase (AspAT, involved in the protein biosynthesis), and the serine hydroxymethyltransferase (SHMT, a key enzyme within the folate metabolism).
Alfa-Difluoromethylornithine (DFMO), a potent drug used for the treatment of African sleeping sickness is an irreversible inhibitor of ornithine decarboxylase (ODC), the first rate limiting enzyme of polyamine biosynthesis.
This is the first study from north India reporting CYP1B1 mutations in Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome with bilateral buphthalmos and early onset glaucoma.
Purported BS2 cases may be divided into: (1) Bardet-Biedl syndrome with fortuitous coloboma or aniridia, (2) BS2 sensu stricto, a recessively inherited syndrome of sexual infantilism, short stature, coloboma, and preaxial polydactyly without obesity, only known from the original report, (3) a "new" dominantly inherited form of colobomatous microphthalmia occasionally associated with obesity, hypogonadism, and mental retardation, to which our observations belong.
Ganglioneuromas (GNs) are benign tumors resulting from neural crest tissue.
Adrenal ganglioneuromas (GNs) constitute rare, differentiated tumors which originate from neural crest cells.
Ganglioneuromas (GNs) are hamartomatous tumors derived from the autonomic nervous system.
GNs are categorized into three different morphological subtypes, namely, polypoid GN, ganglioneuromatous polyposis, and diffuse ganglioneuromatosis.
Ganglioneuromas (GNs) arising from neural crest sympathogonia are rare benign neurogenic tumors.
Ganglioneuromas (GNs) are neural crest cell-derived tumors and rarely occur in the adrenal gland.
Ganglioneuromas (GNs) are the rarest and most benign of the neuroblastic tumors.
Ganglioneuromas (GNs) are rare benign tumors and their association with neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF-1) is especially uncommon.
Four of eight T1D-specific regions contained known type 2 diabetes (T2D) candidate genes (COBL, GLIS3, RNLS and BCAR1), suggesting a shared cellular etiology.
Autoantibodies to insulin (IAA), GAD (GADA), insulinoma-associated antigen-2 (IA-2A) and zinc transporter 8 (ZnT8A) were measured in follow-up sera, and genotyping for type 1 diabetes susceptibility genes (HLA-DR/HLA-DQ, INS variable number of tandem repeats [VNTR] and single nucleotide polymorphisms at PTPN22, PTPN2, ERBB3, IL2, SH2B3, CTLA4, IFIH1, KIAA0350 [also known as CLEC16A], CD25, IL18RAP, IL10, COBL) was performed on the DNA samples of children born to a parent with type 1 diabetes and prospectively followed from birth for up to 22 years.
Children of parents with type 1 diabetes and prospectively followed from birth for the development of islet autoantibodies and diabetes were genotyped for single-nucleotide polymorphisms at 12 type 1 diabetes susceptibility genes (ERBB3, PTPN2, IFIH1, PTPN22, KIAA0350, CD25, CTLA4, SH2B3, IL2, IL18RAP, IL10 and COBL).
The greatest diabetes discrimination was obtained by the sum of risk alleles for eight genes (IFIH1, CTLA4, PTPN22, IL18RAP, SH2B3, KIAA0350, COBL and ERBB3) in the HLA-risk children.
However, all of the eosinophil-activating cytokines, such as IL-5, IL-3, and GM-CSF, are typically present in atopic diseases, including allergic asthma.
In a murine model of allergic asthma, we found that Tyk-2((-/-)) asthmatic mice have induced peribronchial collagen deposition, mucosal type mast cells in the lung, IRF4 and hyperproliferative lung Th2 CD4(+) effector T cells over-expressing IL-3, IL-4, IL-5, IL-10 and IL-13.
Heterologous or homologous Nrf2 deletion (Nrf2+/- or Nrf2-/-) rescued the pancreatic phenotypes, weight loss and hypoglycemia in KC::Keap1 mice, suggesting that Nrf2 is a major downstream target of Keap1.
Disrupting the Keap1-Nrf2 pathway enhances Nrf2 activity, which has been identified as an important approach for the prevention of different chronic diseases in which oxidative stress and inflammation are present, such as cancer, diabetes, Alzheimer's and Parkinson's.
This study investigates the role of ACSVL3 in the maintenance of glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) stem cell self-renewal and the capacity of GBM stem cells to initiate tumor xenograft formation.
We examined ACSVL3 expression during differentiation of several GBM stem cell enriched neurosphere cultures.
ACSVL3 expression levels were substantially increased in GBM stem cell enriched neurosphere cultures and decreased after differentiation of the neurospheres.
Furthermore, ACSVL3 knockdown reduced anchorage-independent neurosphere cell growth, neurosphere-forming capacity as well as self-renewal of these GBM stem cell enriched neurosphere cultures.
A link between ACSVL3 and cancer stem cell phenotype was further established by the findings that ACSVL3 expression was regulated by receptor tyrosine kinase pathways that support GBM stem cell self-renewal and tumor initiation, including EGFR and HGF/c-Met pathways.
Our findings indicate that the lipid metabolism enzyme ACSVL3 is involved in GBM stem cell maintenance and the tumor-initiating capacity of GBM stem cell enriched-neurospheres in animals.
A significant association was detected between TLR9 genotypes and some of the disease manifestations as myositis (p = 0.032), psychosis (p = 0.014), photosensitivity (p = 0.002), and pleurisy (p = &lt;0.001).
In addition, rLj-HMGB2 could induce the generation of proinflammatory mediators in the activated human acute monocytic leukemia cell line (THP1), which suggested that Lj-HMGB2 may participate in the immune response of the lampreys.
Nut consumption was independently associated with a decreased risk of overall and vascular-disease mortality, particularly in women.
Nut consumption has been inconsistently associated with risk of stroke.
Ulcerative colitis patients display increased numbers of circulating pro-inflammatory monocyte human leukocyte antigen-DR [HLA-DRhi] monocytes expressing high levels of the gut-homing C-C chemokine receptor 9 [CCR9] and tumour necrosis factor [TNF]-Alfa.
The aim of this first-in-human, double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled trial was to evaluate selective removal of circulating CCR9-expressing monocytes by leukapheresis in patients with moderate to severe ulcerative colitis, with regards to safety, tolerability, and immunological response.
Patients with ulcerative colitis were treated every second day with leukapheresis during five sessions with a C-C chemokine ligand 25 [CCL25; CCR9 ligand] column or a placebo column.
CC chemokine receptor type 9 (CCR9) activation by CCL25 plays a key role in leukocyte recruitment to the gut and represents a therapeutic target in inflammatory bowel disease.
The selective CCR9 antagonist vercirnon progressed to phase 3 clinical trials in Crohn's disease but efficacy was limited, with the need for very high doses to block receptor activation.
To investigate whether Imiquimod (IMQ) as TLR7 ligand protects mice from colonic inflammation and the mechanisms underlying in such immunoregulatory conditions.#　METHODS: Murine colitis was induced to Balb/c mice by administration of trinitrobenzene sulfonic acid (TNBS) with or without daily intraperitoneal administration of IMQ.#　Colitis was evaluated by body weight decreases and by histological score.#　Also colonic mRNA expression was measured by RT-PCR.#　To confirm the induction of Regulatory T cells (Tregs) by type-1 IFN from pDCs, we generated mouse bone marrow-derived pDCs and co-cultured these with CD4+ T cells isolated from mouse spleen with or without IMQ stimulation.#　Cytokine production in the culture supernatant was measured by ELISA and the number of Tregs were analyzed by flow cytometry.#　Spleen and mesenteric lymph nodes (MLN) from IMQ-treated mice were collected, and mRNA expressions of cytokine were measured by RT-PCR and cytokine productions were measured by ELISA.#　Tregs and chemokine expressions were analyzed in colon of TNBS-induced colitis mouse by immunohistochemistry.#　RESULTS: Administration of IMQ significantly suppressed colonic inflammation of TNBS-induced colitis.#　In the colons of IMQ-treated mice, mRNA expression of TNF-Alfa was decreased, and strong expressions of IL-6, IFN-Beta and TGF-Beta were detected.#　IL-10 and TGF-Beta productions were increased in the supernatant of co-cultured cells stimulated with IMQ, although we were unable to detect Treg differentiaton in IMQ-stimulated co-cultured cells.#　In MLN of IMQ-treated mice, strong expressions of TLR7, IFN-Beta, TGF-Beta and Foxp3 mRNA were detected.#　IL-10 production from MLN cells was also increased in the IMQ-treated group.#　Finally, Tregs in the inflamed colon and CCR9 in MLN of IMQ-treated mice were detected.#　CONCLUSION: These results suggest that IMQ protects mice from TNBS colitis through induction of CCR9, which regulates accumulation of Tregs in the inflamed colon.
We here showed that CCR9+ CD11b+ macrophages play an important role during the course of Concanavalin A-induced murine acute liver injury as well as human acute hepatitis via the production of inflammatory cytokines and the Th1 induction.
We found 54 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 5 genes associated with celiac disease (TAGAP, IL18R1, RGS21, PLEK, and CCR9) in time to celiac disease analyses (10-4&gt;P&gt;5.8x10-6).
Including chemokines [C-C motif ligand (CCL) 19, CCL20, CCL21, C-X-C motif ligand (CXCL) 6, CXCL10, and CXCL11] and soluble cytokine and chemokine receptors [soluble (s) interleukin (IL) 6 receptor (R), soluble tumor necrosis factor receptor (sTNFR) 1, sTNFR2, and sIL-R2], ten inflammation-related markers, were nominally associated with diabetes (P&lt;0.05).
We identified mutations in melanoma-associated antigen D2 in all study participants and showed, in vivo and in vitro, reduced expression of the furosemide and thiazide sensitive transporters sodium-potassium-2-chloride cotransporter and sodium chloride cotransporter, respectively.
MAGED2 mutations caused X-linked polyhydramnios with prematurity and a severe but transient form of antenatal Bartter's syndrome.We distinguish two types of hereditary NDI: a 'pure' type with loss of water only and a complex type with loss of water and ions.
A new variant of this was recently identified: seven families were described with transient antenatal Bartter's syndrome, polyhydramnios and MAGED2 mutations.Multiple compounds have been identified experimentally that may stimulate urinary concentration independently of the vasopressin V2 receptor.
Fluorescent and radio conjugates of 11B6, an antibody targeting free hK2, are internalized and noninvasively report AR pathway activity in metastatic and genetically engineered models of cancer development and treatment.
Humanized 11B6, which has undergone toxicological tests in nonhuman primates, has the potential to improve patient management in these cancers.
MAGE-D2 is new gene found to cause severe polyhydramnios and transient postnatal Bartter-like syndrome.
These women were divided into two after breast cancer groups (BCG1 and BCG2) and a control group (CG).
Group BCG1 consisted of women who had undergone breast cancer surgery within the last 18months and BCG2 those whose postoperative periods were more than 18months.
The indices in millisecond, RMSSD (BCG1=19.83; BCG2=14.99; CG=31.46), SD1 (BCG1=14.03; BCG2=10.61; CG=22.27), SD2 (BCG1=39.17; BCG2=35.28; CG=61.16), SDNN (BCG1=29.58; BCG2=26.12; CG=46.36) and HF in milliseconds squared (BCG1=194.2; BCG2=91.07; CG=449.4) showed statistically significant reductions in the breast cancer groups compared to the CG (p&lt;=0.0001).
The discovery that mutations in MAGED2 cause a rare and transient form of antenatal Bartter's Syndrome may have implications beyond the very small number of affected families.
We identified a mutation in MAGED2 in each of the 13 infants in our analysis who had transient antenatal Bartter's syndrome.
MAGED2 encodes melanoma-associated antigen D2 (MAGE-D2) and maps to the X chromosome.
We also identified two different MAGED2 mutations in two families with idiopathic polyhydramnios.
We found that MAGED2 mutations caused X-linked polyhydramnios with prematurity and a severe but transient form of antenatal Bartter's syndrome.
Virulence factors profiling showed that most of MRSA isolates in our center carried the virulence factor pattern of cna-clfA-clfB-eno-fib-icaA-icaD-sea-psmAlfa-lukED-hlg-hlgv-hla-hld (214/239, 89.54%).
The main virulence genes in these strains were hlg (33.3%), scn (23.3%), cna (20%), hlb (20%), and clfA (18.3%), others including icaA, fnbA, tst, seb, hld, eta and sea.
Other virulence genes detected were (number of strains): tsst-1 (6), hla (15), hlb (9), hld (15), hlg (6), hlgv (9), cna (2), aur (14), and egc-like cluster (3).
Search terms and synonyms for "aerobic exercise" and "Down syndrome" were used within the following databases: CENTRAL (2007, Issue 1); MEDLINE via PUBMED (1966 to March 2007); EMBASE (2005 to April 2007); CINAHL (1982 to March 2007); LILACS (1982 to March 2007); PsycINFO (1887 to March 2007); ERIC (1966 to March 2007); CCT (March 2007); Academic Search Elite (to March 2007), C2- SPECTR (to March 2007 ), NRR (2007 Issue 1), ClinicalTrials.gov (accessed March 2007) and within supplements of Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise.
Search terms and synonyms for "aerobic exercise" and "Down syndrome" were used within the following databases:CENTRAL (2005, Issue 2); MEDLINE (1966 to March 2005); EMBASE (2005 to April 2005); CINAHL (1982 to March 2005); LILACS (1982 to March 2005); PsycINFO (1887 to March 2005); ERIC (1966 to March 2005); CCT (March 2005); Academic Search Elite (to March 2005), C2- SPECTR (to March 2005 ), NRR (2005 Issue 1), ClinicalTrials.gov (accessed March 2005)and within supplements of Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise.
FMT in inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD), irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) and metabolic syndrome should only be performed in research settings.
Blockade of CD69-Myl9/12 interaction ameliorates allergic airway inflammation in ovalbumin-induced and house dust mite-induced mouse models of asthma.
A greater activation of myosin, via increased phosphorylation of its regulatory light chain (LC20) by myosin light chain kinase, correlates with an increased Vmax in models of AH and in human asthmatic bronchial SM cells.
Some of the differentially expressed lncRNAs that were upregulated, such as AK124776, lincRNA-RAB12-1, KRT8P25, RP11-474J18.4, AC000110.1, KRT8P13, KRT8P10, BC072678, and downregulated, such as nc-HOXB9-206, RP11-160A10.2, nc-HOXA11-86, nc-HOXD10-7, nc-HOXB9-205, CES4, nc-HOXD12-3, systematic research on these lncRNAs will help clarify the mechanisms of urothelial carcinoma of the bladder and guide the early diagnosis and treatment of this cancer in the future.
Proteins labeled with LCA were Rab-3, Rab-12, Rab-16, and M-Ras.
Moreover, the ANT2 precursors were observed to change in oncocytomas.
In particular, a high transcript level for the adenine nucleotide translocator isoform 2(ANT2) gene, which is usually not expressed in differentiated cells, was observed in oncocytoma and malignant urothelial renal tumor.
Ruxolitinib was found to fully inhibit IL-6-mediated repression of CYP (CYP1A2, CYP2B6 and CYP3A4) and transporter (NTCP, OATP1B1 and OCT1) mRNA levels in primary human hepatocytes and differentiated hepatoma HepaRG cells.
This study aimed to assess inflammatory, cardiac, renal and hematological markers in 56 breast cancer patients (BCP) before, during and after termination of chemotherapy with CYP and DOX.
Based on the results, we conclude that breast cancer and co-treatment of CYP and DOX interfere with various biological markers, thereby, showing the physiological imbalance.
Epoxyeicosatrienoic acid (EET) production via cytochrome P450 (CYP) epoxygenases closely correlates with the progression of breast cancer.
Here, we found that CYP3A4 expression and its epoxy-product, 11,12-epoxyeicosatrienoic acid (11,12-EET) was enhanced in tamoxifen (TAM)-resistant MCF-7 (TAMR-MCF-7) breast cancer cells compared to control MCF-7 cells.
Our findings suggest that the CYP3A4-mediated EET pathway represents a potential therapeutic target for the treatment of tamoxifen-resistant breast cancer.
CYP3A4 was unexpectedly associated with breast cancer mitochondria and synthesized arachidonic acid (AA)-derived epoxyeicosatrienoic acids (EETs), which promoted the electron transport chain/respiration and inhibited AMPKAlfa.
CYP3A4 knockdown activated AMPKAlfa, promoted autophagy, and prevented mammary tumor formation.
Comprehensive genotyping of CYP enzymes and transporters was performed using the iPLEX ADME PGx Pro Panel in 302 tamoxifen-treated breast cancer patients.
It has been recently reported that CD38 was highly expressed in adipose tissues from obese people and CD38-deficient mice were resistant to high-fat diet (HFD)-induced obesity.
In this study, to explore the roles of CD38 in adipogenesis and lipogenesis in vivo and in vitro, obesity models were generated with male CD38-/- and WT mice fed with HFD.
The results showed that CD38-/- male mice were significantly resistant to HFD-induced obesity.
These results suggest that CD38 deficiency impairs adipogenesis and lipogenesis through activating Sirt1/PPARGamma-FASN signalling pathway during the development of obesity.
We also found that obesity development was associated with an increase in the number of CD38+ adipose progenitors, this effect being more pronounced in intra-abdominal than in subcutaneous fat, suggesting a higher rate of adipocyte commitment in visceral depots.
In this study, we show that CD45RO+CD38+ Beta cell Ag-specific CD4+ T cells were present at higher frequencies in type 1 diabetes subjects compared with those in healthy subjects.
Regulation of the SIRT/NAD system was associated with early (SIRT4, SIRT7, NAPRT1 and NMNAT2) and late phases (NMNAT3, NMRK2, ABCA1 and CD38) of glucose intolerance.
A total of eleven of genes were differently expressed in celiac patients compared with disease controls of which CD36, CD38, FOXP1, SELL, PPARA, PPARG, AGT previously associated with type 2 diabetes and AKAP6, NTNG1 with anorexia nervosa remained significant after correction for multiple testing.
PF significantly increased the expression of nuclear factor-YA (NF-YA), which strongly upregulated the molecules involved in the proteolytic machinery [molecular chaperones, carboxyl terminus of Hsc70-interacting protein and transcription factor EB], which thus mitigated the behavioral and pathological impairments in an SBMA mouse model through the upregulation of pathogenic androgen receptor protein clearance in motor neurons and muscles.
One hundred and seven patients (49.3%) had no significant change in BP; 30.9% had intradialytic hypertension (IDHT) while 19.8% had intradialytic hypotension (IDH).
This week's articles describe ways to treat arthritis caused by chikungunya virus, IDH-mutant cancers, and hypertension.
On univariate analysis, diabetes mellitus, hypertension (HTN), cerebrovascular accident (CVA), left ventricular dysfunction (LVD), peripheral vascular disease (PVD), smoking, hepatitis C, inadequate dialysis, intradialytic hypotension (IDH), interdialytic weight gain, low serum creatinine &lt;4 mg/dL, and anemia (Hb &lt;10 g/dL) were found to be statistically significantly different between frail and nonfrail groups On multivariate regression analysis, only HTN, PVD, CVA, anemia, smoking, and IDH were found to be significant.
Factors predicting frailty include HTN, smoking, LVD, PVD, CVA, smoking, anemia, and IDH.
Intradialytic hypertension (IDH) increases morbidity and mortality.
Intradialytic hypertension (ID-HTN) is an increasingly recognized phenomenon and although less common than IDH, portends poor cardiovascular prognosis as well as reflects higher hypertension burden in the dialysis population.
Dry weight, hypertension, and phosphorus levels are modifiable risk factors to possibly reduce the rate of IDH episodes.
We believe that all hypertension guidelines should follow the National Institute for Health and Excellence (NICE) and make IDP and CTD first choice 'thiazide-like diuretics.'
Immunohistochemical analysis with the anti-SOX6 antibody showed that all the glioma tissues analyzed (14 glioblastomas, 14 anaplastic astrocytomas, 3 anaplastic oligoastrocytomas, 5 diffuse astrocytomas, 1 oligodendroglioma, and 1 pilocytic astrocytoma) expressed SOX6 in tumor cells, but only a few SOX6-positive cells were detected in nonneoplastic tissues from the cerebral cortex.
To address these issues, we analyzed the production of proinflammatory mediators in mouse thyroid organs and demonstrate consistency with in vitro studies performed previously that Il1alpha, Il1beta, Il6, and Tnfalpha and the enzyme Cox2 are produced by RP3-transgenic thyroid tissue, but absent from nontransgenic thyroids.
With a few exceptions, higher circulating levels of endostatin seem to reflect vascular and myocardial damage, and a worsened prognosis for cardiovascular events or mortality in individuals with hypertension, diabetes, kidney disease, cardiovascular disease, as well as in the general population.
Endostatin is one of the main angiostatic mediators, and inhibits angiogenesis and prevents progression of atherosclerosis.
For ischemic versus hemorrhagic strokes comparison, NT-proBNP (N-Terminal Pro-B-Type Natriuretic Peptide) &gt;4.9 (odds ratio, 2.40; 95% confidence interval, 1.55-3.71; P&lt;0.0001) and endostatin &gt;4.7 (odds ratio, 2.02; 95% confidence interval, 1.19-3.45; P=0.010), together with age, sex, blood pressure, stroke severity, atrial fibrillation, and hypertension, were included in the model.
In patients with coronary heart disease, the count of endothelial progenitor cells was lower by 4 times, the level of VEGF was higher by 52%, and the level of endostatin was lower by 13% than in healthy volunteers.
To examine the association between the serum endostatin levels and subclinical atherosclerosis independent of traditional risk factors in a healthy Japanese population.
A higher serum endostatin level reflected subclinical atherosclerosis in this Japanese population.
The most common diseases among humanitarian cases were benign tumors (29%, 5/17), cranioplasty (23%, 4/17), obstructive hydrocephalus (11%, 2/17), nonobstructive hydrocephalus (11%, 2/17), hemifacial spasm (11%, 2/17), and cerebral angiography (11%, 2/17).
Twenty-seven (33.8%) patients developed ARE, 5 (6%) developed hydrocephalus, 10 (12.5%) reported new ataxia, 17 (21%) developed trigeminal dysfunction, 3 (3.75%) had facial weakness, and 1 patient developed hemifacial spasm.
Twelve factors, including gender, hypertension, intracranial aneurysm, cerebral vascular spasm, hydrocephalus and conscious disturbance during hospitalization, smoking, age, WFNS (World Federation of Neurological Surgeons) scale, Fisher grade, white blood cell count and blood glucose level at admission, were analyzed by using Chi-square test, t test, and Logistic multiple regression analysis.
We studied 37 patients with spasm, trisomy 21, prematurity, epilepsy, psychomotor retardation, and/or hydrocephalus (study group) and 67 control patients, all between 14 months and 14 years of age.
Surgical treatment after radiosurgery or radiotherapy may be necessary for tumors that continue to grow, or for patients who develop brainstem compressive symptoms, disabling hemifacial spasm, or hydrocephalus.
Among these, 236 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were statistically significant, including many DEGs that were novel in cervical cancer, including gastrulation brain homeobox 2,5-hydroxytryptamine receptor 1D and endothelin 3.
A total of 5 overlapping genes [dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP4); endothelin 3 (EDN3); fibroblast growth factor 14 (FGF14); tachykinin, precursor 1 (TAC1); and wingless-type MMTV integration site family, member 16 (WNT16)] between the 561 overlapping differentially methylated genes and the 242 DEGs were identified, which were downregulated and hypermethylated simultaneously in cervical cancer samples.
Employing functions of several bioinformatics tools, we selected 143 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) associated with the cervical cancer.
The results of bioinformatics analysis show that these DEGs play important roles in the development of cervical cancer.
A total of 1,160 and 756 DEGs were identified in the pre-invasive and invasive stages of cervical cancer, respectively.
Survival analysis then revealed a five-PcG gene signature one protective gene (enhancer of zeste homolog 1) and four risky genes (EZH2, PHD finger protein 19, DNMT3A and DNMT3B), which may identify patients with high risk of poor prognosis of glioma.
In this study, we exploited this platform to evaluate the behavior of two biodegradable formulations, poly-Epsilon-caprolactone (PCL3) and poly lactic-acid (PLA8), respectively, in cellular and animal models of triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC).
Interestingly, changes in EZH2, PHF19, CBX7, CBX6 and EZH1 occurred progressively as astrocytoma grade increased.
In this report, we show that PHF19 silencing reduces the cell proliferation rate and increases the transendothelial migration capacities of melanoma cell lines.
Our data therefore indicate the role of PHF19 and its upstream regulator, Akt, in the phenotype switch of melanoma cells from proliferative to invasive states.
Interestingly, the products of the hPCL3 gene, particularly the short form, hPCL3S, are markedly overexpressed in many types of cancers, including colon, skin, lung, rectal, cervical, uterus, and liver cancers.
Both hPCL3S and hPCL3L messages were increased dramatically in most cell lines derived from various stages of melanoma and glioma tumor progression.
Fifty patients (19 males and 31 females, mean age 52.4 y) showed sagging posterior layer TLF, and 32 of them developed &gt;=1 junctional problems, such as retrolistheses (n=25), compression fractures (n=5), spondylolistheses (n=4), progressive scoliosis (n=4), and segmental instability with bone marrow change (n=2).
However, the patients with thoracolumbar fracture (TLF) had significantly more MSCs than those with degenerative disc disease (DDD), but not for NCs.
Common physiological pathways are involved in several ARCA, such as DNA repair deficiency (AOA1, ataxia telangiectasia [AT]...), RNA termination disorder (AOA2), mitochondrial defect (FRDA, sensory ataxic neuropathy with dysarthria and ophthalmoplegia [Sando]...), lipoprotein assembly defects (AVED, abetalipoproteinemia [ABL]), chaperon protein disorders (ARSACS, Marinesco-Sjoegren syndrome [MSS]) or peroxysomal diseases (Refsum disease [RD]).
While Friedreich's ataxia (FRDA) and ataxia telangiectasia (AT) are known to be the two most frequent forms of autosomal recessive cerebellar ataxia (ARCA), knowledge on the other forms of ARCA has been obtained only recently, and they appear to be rarer.
Transcription factor MEF2C regulates multiple genes linked to autism spectrum disorder (ASD), and human MEF2C haploinsufficiency results in ASD, intellectual disability, and epilepsy.
The microRNAs target a group of genes enriched for synaptic signaling and epilepsy risk, including SLC12A5, SYT1, GRIN2A, GRIN2B, KCNB1, SCN2A, TSC1, and MEF2C.
Genome-wide association studies and meta-analyses implicated that increased risk of developing Alzheimer's diseases (AD) has been associated with the ABCA7, APOE, BIN1, CASS4, CD2AP, CD33, CELF1, CLU, CR1, DSG2, EPHA1, FERMT2, HLA-DRB1, HLA-DRB4, INPP5D, MEF2C, MS4A4A, MS4A4E, MS4A6E, NME8, PICALM, PLD3, PTK2B, RIN3, SLC24A4, SORL1, and ZCWPW1 genes.
Epilepsy-causing SIK1 sequence variations resulted in abnormalities in the MEF2C-ARC pathway of neuronal development and synapse activity response.
This work provides the first insights into the mechanisms of pathogenesis in SIK1 syndrome, and extends the ARX-MEF2C pathway in the pathogenesis of developmental epilepsy.
A common single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP, rs190982) in MEF2C gene was identified to be related to late-onset Alzheimer's disease (LOAD) in Caucasians in a large meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies (GWAS).
A key factor protecting from oxidative stress in gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) and in type 2 diabetes (T2D) is paraoxonase-1 (PON1).
In this study our aim was to evaluate paraoxonase (PON1) activity and free sulfhydryl groups (-SH) as antioxidative parameters and lipid hydroperoxide (LOOH) as oxidative parameter in the serum of women with gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) and determine their relation with the degree of subclinical atherosclerosis.
To clarify the levels of protein oxidation markers such as protein carbonyl (PCO), protein hydroperoxides (P-OOH), advanced oxidation protein products (AOPP) and nitrotyrosine (NT), as well as antioxidative enzymes such as paraoxonase (PON-1) in women with and without gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM).
Recently, numerous new antibodies defining the characteristic clinical phenotype have been described as anti-MDA5 antibodies associated with interstitial lung disease and amyopathic dermatomyositis or anti-TIF1Gamma antibodies as markers for paraneoplastic dermatomyositis.
PM is associated with anti-synthetase antibodies (anti-Jo-1, PL-7, PL-12, OJ, and EJ) and DM with anti-Mi-2, anti-SAE, anti-TIF-1-Gamma and anti-NXP2 (both associated with cancer) or anti-MDA5 antibodies (associated with interstitial lung disease).
Twenty-six (43.3%) PM/DM-ILD patients were anti-aminoacyl tRNA-synthetase antibody-positive (anti-ARS-positive), 15 (25.0%) were anti-melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5 antibody-positive (anti-MDA5-positive), 3 (5%) were anti-signal recognition particle antibody-positive, 1 (1.7%) was anti-transcriptional intermediary factor 1-gamma antibody-positive, and 15 (25%) were MSA-negative.
Antibodies to transcription intermediary factor 1Gamma/Alfa (TIF1Gamma/Alfa, p155/140) are frequently found in DM associated with malignancy while anti-melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5 (MDA5; CADM140) are associated with clinically amyopathic DM (CADM) complicated by rapidly progressive ILD.
Anti-TIF-1Gamma positive patients were less likely to have systemic features including interstitial lung disease, Raynaud phenomenon, and arthritis/arthralgia.
The frequency of pulmonary fibrosis during the disease progression was 2/12, 1/4 and 1/4 in anti-TIF1Gamma, anti-NXP2 and anti-SAE, respectively.
Each of the identified mutations altered the equilibrium between alternative GR conformations distinctively, indicating that the Hsp90 dependence of SRs may correlate with differences in the conformational dynamics of these receptors.
The ubiquitous heat shock protein 90 (hsp90) has been shown to participate directly in the function of a wide variety of cellular signal transduction components, including steroid receptors (SRs).
However, there is still no direct evidence for an in vivo association of SRs with hsp90.
The results suggest that the interaction of SRs with the hsp90 is minimal when compared to a bona fide type of interaction with the co-factors.
To address the role of endothelial Cx43 in this process, we analyzed Cx43 regulation in human umbilical vein endothelial cells in the proximity of Cx43high (DU-145 and MAT-LyLu) and Cx43low prostate cancer cells (PC-3 and AT-2).
The data on the nature of AT2-R expression in prostate tissue of prostate cancer patients may be considered as a tool for predicting biochemical recurrence after combined hormone and radiation therapy.
The present study found that, similarly to 5-fluorouracil, low concentrations (1-10 myM) of 9-aminoacridine (9-AAA) inhibited the growth of the two rat prostate cancer AT-2 and Mat-LyLu cell lines and the human melanoma A375 cell line.
Furthermore, our previous studies indicate that increased expression of Ang II type 2 receptor (AT2R) alone induced apoptosis in human prostate cancer lines, an effect that did not require Ang II.
Human prostate cancer DU145 xenograft mouse model was used to assess the effect of AT2R on tumor growth in vivo.
The results showed that AT2R overexpression can inhibit tumor growth of prostate cancer in vivo by inhibiting proliferation and inducing apoptosis of tumor cells.
The aim of the present study was the evaluation of AT1 and AT2 expressions in human prostate cancers.
The data on AT1 and AT2 receptor expressions may suggest the involvement of RAS in prostate cancerogenesis.
sartanes) and/or AT2 agonists in prostate cancer prophylaxis and/or treatment.
The results indicate that CEGA using the new circular stapling device in surgery of the esophageal carcinoma is a very effective procedure to improve the anastomotic technique from a traditional hand-sewn anastomosis to a stapled anastomosis and can reduce the incidence of complications.
An unusual retinal pigment epitheliopathy resembling ophthalmomyiasis interna posterior (OMI) is endemic to Guam.
Toxicity, such as mucositis, leukocytopenia and neutropenia, was higher in ConcCRTx than in CTx followed by RTx.
At the 4th dose level (Ctx 1400 mg/m2, Epidx 100 mg/m2, 5-Fu 600 mg/m2), two patients had dose-limiting mucositis and one patient developed dose-limiting neutropenia.
Therefore, the effect of CKD on the disposition of CYP1A2-metabolized, CYP2C8-metabolized, CYP2C9-metabolized, CYP2C19-metabolized, and organic anion-transporting polypeptide (OATP)-transported drugs was investigated.
We identified dedicated CKD studies with 6, 5, 6, 4, and 12 "model" substrates for CYP1A2, CYP2C8, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, and OATP, respectively.
In contrast, the effect of CKD on CYP1A2, CYP2C9, and CYP2C19 was variable and modest compared to CYP2C8 and OATP.
To investigate the impact of genetic variants in CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP3A4, GSTT1, GSTM1 and GSTP1 on the efficacy of cyclophosphamide (CYC) therapy in patients with lupus nephritis.
Chronic kidney disease (CKD) complicates warfarin anticoagulation partially through its effect on CYP2C9 activity.
CKD increased the effect of CYP2C9 genetic variation on (S)-warfarin and (R,S)-warfarin metabolism.
Tecarfarin exposure was similar between the HVs and the CKD subjects regardless of CYP2C9 genotype.
The CYP2C9 pathway (4-hydroxyflurbiprofen formation clearance) was similar in all the patients with CKD and was concordant with previous reports of patients with end-stage renal disease (ESRD) and healthy controls.
For flurbiprofen, patients with glomerulonephritis had higher oral clearance than those with nonglomerular CKD, suggesting higher unbound fraction and enhanced metabolism through other (non-CYP2C9) routes.
The current study suggests no statistically significant differences in the in vivo activity of CYP2C9 and CYP3A4 in patients with either glomerulonephritis or nonglomerular CKD.
We examined whether the renin inhibitor, aliskiren, provides similar or greater protection than ACE inhibition from non-proliferative diabetic retinopathy and from the proliferative neoangiogenesis of oxygen-induced retinopathy.
To assess angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) levels in aqueous humor and plasma of patients with nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy (NPDR) and proliferative diabetic retinopathy (PDR) as another potent ischemia-induced angiogenic factor.
We observed significantly elevated ACE level in aqueous humor of patients with PDR compared with the patients with NPDR and normal subjects (P = 0.023), but no significant difference was detected between nonproliferative diabetics and control group (P = 0.239).
Studies exploring the association between ACE I/D polymorphism and BDR or PDR may help us better understand the genetics of DR.
To evaluate the effects of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACE-I) in retarding progression of severe non-proliferative diabetic retinopathy (NPDR) in normotensive type 2 diabetic patients.
This was a retrospective case control study of 128 patients with normotensive type 2 diabetes with lower than +1 dipstick proteinuria and severe NPDR who were classified into either an ACE-I treated group (Enalapril maleate 10 mg, n=12 , Ramipril 5 mg, n=17) or an ACE-I untreated group (n=99).
Small doses of ACE-I did not yield any beneficial effects in retarding the progression of severe NPDR.
A7730C variant which showed a high mutation frequency in cervical cancer was predicted to be a binding site for the cellular transcription factor PHOX2A.
miR-326 regulates cell proliferation and migration in lung cancer by targeting Phox2a and is regulated by HOTAIR.
PHOX2B and its paralogue gene PHOX2A are two homeodomain proteins in the network regulating the development of autonomic ganglia that have been associated with the pathogenesis of neuroblastoma (NB), because of their over-expression in different NB cell lines and tumour samples.
To identify novel abnormally methylated genes in early stage non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), we analyzed the methylation status of 13 genes (ALX1, BCL2, FOXL2, HPP1, MYF6, OC2, PDGFRA, PHOX2A, PITX2, RARB, SIX6, SMPD3 and SOX1) in cancer tissues from 101 cases of stage I NSCLC patients and lung tissues from 30 cases of non-cancerous lung disease controls, using methylation-specific PCR (MSP).
The methylation frequencies (29.70-64.36%) of 7 genes (MYF6, SIX6, SOX1, RARB, BCL2, PHOX2A and FOLX2) in stage I NSCLC were significantly higher compared with those in non-cancerous lung disease controls (P&lt;0.05).
Furthermore, we also detected the expression of 8 pathological markers (VEGF, HER-2, P53, P21, EGFR, CHGA, SYN and EMA) in cancer tissues of stage I NSCLC by immunohistochemistry, and found that high expression levels of p53 and CHGA were associated with the methylation of BCL2 (P=0.025) and PHOX2A (P=0.023), respectively.
In this study, among the 7 genes which demonstrated hypermethylation in stage I NSCLC compared with non-cancerous lung diseases, 5 genes (MYF6, SIX6, PHOX2A, FOLX2 and SOX1) were found for the first time to be abonormally methylated in NSCLC.
Heteroplasmic m.3697G&gt;A has been reported in patients with Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy, mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, lactic acidosis and stroke-like episodes and Stuve-Wiedemann syndrome.
These can be grouped into disorders with reduced papillae (Machado-Joseph disease, Stuve-Wiedemann syndrome, familial dysautonomia, dystonia musculorum, and Behcet's disease) and those with taste defects only (Alzheimer's disease, Huntington's disease, hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy type IV, and diabetes mellitus).
We used in-situ hybridization to analyze the expression patterns of three known members (a, b and c) of the RGM ("repulsive guidance molecule") gene family and of the RGMa receptor neogenin in a glaucoma mouse model (DBA/2J strain) and the C57BL/6J strain, which served as a control.
In order to understand the role of the RGMs and neogenin in glaucoma, we characterized their expression patterns in the developing and mature mouse retina and in the optic nerve.
Interestingly, we found a higher expression of RGMa, RGMb and neogenin in the retinas of all glaucoma-affected mice than in the age-matched control strain.
A tool developed for their use--DeAR GP (Dementia Assessment Referral to GP)--empowers care home staff, makes more efficient use of GPs' and specialist memory nurses' time, and improves diagnosis of dementia.
Using homozygous mice for an autosomal dominant hypophosphatemic rickets-FGF23 mutation or animals treated with a furin inhibitor, we showed that cFGF23 and iFGF23 levels increased equivalently after PTH injection.
We discuss in this review the current implications of GRx and/or glutathionylation in the inflammatory response and in diseases associated with chronic inflammation, namely diabetes, atherosclerosis, inflammatory lung disease, cancer, and Alzheimer's disease, and in viral infections.
In addition to arising from the procedure per se, a genetic or cytogenetic abnormality in offspring of an ICSI pregnancy could arise as result of offspring inheriting the mutant gene or chromosomal abnormality conferring paternal infertility: Y deletions (DAZ) in oligospermia males, cystic fibrosis in offspring of males with congenital bilateral absence vas deferens (CBAVD), and sex chromosomal abnormalities in offspring of Klinefelter syndrome (47,XXY) males.
Two recent candidate genes, ErbB3 and Fgfr1, are growth factors whose mRNA levels have been found to be altered in the leukocytes of patients that are affected by bipolar disorder in a depressive state.
Molecular genetics and developmental studies have identified 21 genes in this region (ADRA1A, ARHGEF10, CHRNA2, CHRNA6, CHRNB3, DKK4, DPYSL2, EGR3, FGF17, FGF20, FGFR1, FZD3, LDL, NAT2, NEF3, NRG1, PCM1, PLAT, PPP3CC, SFRP1 and VMAT1/SLC18A1) that are most likely to contribute to neuropsychiatric disorders (schizophrenia, autism, bipolar disorder and depression), neurodegenerative disorders (Parkinson's and Alzheimer's disease) and cancer.
The region on chromosome 3p13-p14 known to contain several chromosomal translocation breakpoints in families with "pure familial renal cell carcinoma" is quite proximal to the VHL locus in 3p25-p26 we have identified.
Immunohistochemical studies and TCR gamma gene rearrangement analysis using a polymerase chain reaction with primers specific for V gamma 1-8 and V gamma 9 gene segments in combination with denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (PCR/ DGGE) were performed on frozen material of 11 pseudo-T-cell lymphomas and 17 CTCLs, including 9 cases of mycosis fungoides (MF) and 8 pleomorphic CTCLs.
Unclassifiable cutaneous T-cell lymphoma was also diagnosed in the second patient: it was associated with a monoclonal proliferation of T-cell receptor V gamma 9, delta + large granular T lymphocytes and finally developed into frank, acute pre-T lymphatic leukemia.
In addition to providing insight into Pol I transcription and ES control, Pol I transcription inhibitors potentially also provide new approaches to treat trypanosomiasis.
In the unicellular parasite Trypanosoma brucei, which causes African sleeping sickness, TbISWI down-regulates RNA polymerase I (Pol I)-transcribed variant surface glycoprotein (VSG) gene expression sites (ESs), which are monoallelically expressed.
Furthermore, miR-130b-DEX significantly reduced expression of PPAR-Gamma downstream factor perilipin 1 as well as adipogenesis genes fatty acid synthase, acetyl coenzyme A carboxylase, 11Beta hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 and fat mass and obesity-associated gene, whereas expression as well as enzyme activity of adipose triglyceride lipase and hormone-sensitive lipase were greatly increased.
A significant association was found between the perilipin rs1052700 polymorphism and T2D, and between the FTO rs3751812 polymorphism and obesity (P = 0.03 and 0.003, respectively); however, no significant relationship was found between rs3751812 and T2D.
The perilipin rs1052700 polymorphism is related to T2D but not obesity.
This prospective study recruited 22 patients with ESRD who underwent a first living kidney allograft transplantation, comprising 12 patients with CYP3A5*1 allele (CYP3A5*1/*1 or *1/*3) and 10 patients without CYP3A5*1 allele (CYP3A5*3/*3).
Nineteen SNPs in the ABCB1, NR1I2, UGT1A1, SLCO1B1 and CYP3A5 genes were examined in case patients with atazanavir/ritonavir-induced nephrolithiasis (n = 31) and controls (n = 47).
Calcineurin inhibitor (CNI) use is considered to play a major role in the development of CKD after LT. We studied the influence of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the genes of the donor and recipient CNI-metabolizing enzyme CYP3A5 and the CNI-transporting ABCB1 on the development of CKD after LT. Tacrolimus (Tac) predose concentrations at different time-points after transplantation and the CYP3A5 6986A&gt;G and ABCB1 3435C&gt;T SNPs were determined in 125 LT recipients and their respective donors to study the influence of Tac predose levels and genetics on the development of CKD.
Neither did we find a correlation between the investigated SNPs in either donor or recipient ABCB1 and CYP3A5 genes (or combinations thereof) and the development of CKD.
An individual's risk of developing CKD after LT is not associated with genetic variation in either recipient or donor CYP3A5 or ABCB1 genotype status.
In conclusion, these results suggest that CYP3A5 polymorphism and plasma concentration of 3-INDS may account for the interindividual variability of CYP3A activity, and that plasma concentration of 3-INDS may partially explain the gap in CYP3A activity that cannot be explained by genetic contribution in patients with renal failure.
#目#的#： #探#讨FGD6  (faciogenital dysplasia) #基#因#对#肝#干#细#胞#分#化#调#控#的#作#用#。 #方#法#： #选#取FGD6#基#因#干#扰#靶#序#列, #使#用AdEasy#系#统#构#建#腺#病#毒#载#体, #包#装#并#扩#增#重#组#腺#病#毒#载#体pSES-FGD6-siRNA, #感#染HP14.5#细#胞#。#细#胞#免#疫#荧#光#检#测FGD6#蛋#白#在HP14.5#细#胞#中#的#表#达#水#平, #实#时#荧#光#定#量PCR#检#测FGD6#、#甲#胎#蛋#白 (AFP) #及#白#蛋#白 (Alb) #的mRNA#水#平, Western blot#检#测FGD6#、AFP#及Alb#的#蛋#白#表#达#水#平#。#每#组#细#胞#均#设#置pSES-Ad-RFP#腺#病#毒#空#载#体#感#染#进#行#对#照#。#所#有#数#据#用#均#数+/-#标#准#差 (x+/-s) #表#示, #采#用#单#因#素#方#差#分#析#。 #结#果#： FGD6#蛋#白#主#要#表#达#于HP14.5#细#胞#胞#核#中#。#成#功#构#建#腺#病#毒#载#体pSES-FGD6-siRNA#。#下#调FGD6#基#因#在HP14.5#细#胞#中#的#表#达, #可#降#低AFP#的mRNA#及#蛋#白#的#表#达, #而#升#高Alb#的mRNA#及#蛋#白#的#表#达 (P&lt;0.01) #。 #结#论#： #抑#制FGD6#基#因#在HP14.5#细#胞#中#的#表#达, #可#使HP14.5#细#胞#向#肝#细#胞#方#向#分#化, #因#此, FGD6#基#因#对#肝#干#细#胞#分#化#调#控#可#能#起#着#重#要#作#用#。.
Filtered albumin has been suggested to be a cause of the glomerular and tubular injuries observed at advanced stages of Alport syndrome.
To directly investigate the role that albumin plays in the progression of disease in Alport syndrome, we generated albumin knockout (Alb(-/-)) mice to use as a tool for removing albuminuria as a component of kidney disease.
Alb mutant mice were bred to collagen-Alfa3(IV) knockout (Col4a3(-/-)) mice, which are a model for human Alport syndrome.
We conclude that filtered albumin is injurious to kidney cells in Alport syndrome and perhaps in other proteinuric kidney diseases, including diabetic nephropathy.
On the other hand, we believe that tumor depth of invasion (&gt;=4 mm), POI, and VEGF-C expression all need to be considered in the preoperative and postoperative planning stages for tongue cancer treatment.
The use of a therapeutic approach which blocks lymphangiogenic factors, such as VEGF-C and VEGF-D, may be beneficial in suppressing the lymphatic spread of tongue cancer with intense intranodal lymphangiogenesis.
VEGF, VEGF-C, VEGF-D and MIA expression levels of metastatic tongue cancer HSC-3 cells were higher than those with no metastatic HSC-4 cells, and VEGF, VEGF-C and VEGF-D expression levels were decreased by MIA siRNA treatment in both cells.
Vascular endothelial growth factor and Notch1 expression are significantly related to cervical lymph node metastasis and depth of invasion in tongue cancer patients.
Mutant-type p53 and VEGF are known to be related to angiogenesis, and maspin is a potent angiogenic inhibitor but its role in tongue cancer has scarcely been examined.
We observed the expression of maspin, mutant-type p53 and VEGF by immunohistochemistry in 33 patients with stages I and II oral tongue cancer.
In an experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis model of CNS autoimmunity, we found activation-induced cytidine deaminase, a GC-defining enzyme, in meningeal ELT (mELT) densely populated by B and T cells.
A prospective randomized survey of 113 abortions carried out by 1 operator using a single technique among women in the 7th-10th week of amenorrhea was undertaken to test the effectiveness of systemically administered oxytocins to reduce bleeding during therapeutic abortion by suction.
This cross-sectional study includes 304 patients with type 2 diabetes treated with oral antidiabetic drugs (ADOs) and a glomerular filtration rate (estimated GFR) &amp;lt;60ml/min/1.73m2.
The purpose of this study was to evaluate the hypothesis that acute hyperglycaemia in hearts of rats without diabetes alters coronary vascular responses to nitric oxide (NO), adenosine (ADO) and phenylephrine (PHE).
In conclusion, STZ-diabetes mellitus enhances the antiphosphaturic effect of ADO by mechanisms unrelated to ADO A1 receptor stimulation.
Bradykinin type 1 receptor antagonism could represent a promising therapeutic tool in combination with TZD for the treatment of T2D, obesity and insulin resistance.
The aim of this study was to analyze the acute responses of bradykinin, insulin, and glycemia to exercise performed above and below lactate threshold (LT) in individuals with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2D).
To examine the association of bradykinin and related peptides with the development of diabetic nephropathy lesions in 243 participants with type 1 diabetes (T1D) from the Renin-Angiotensin System Study who, at baseline, were normoalbuminuric, normotensive and had normal or increased glomerular filtration rate (GFR).
Heterozygosity for missense mutations in Seipin, namely N88S and S90L, leads to a broad spectrum of motor neuropathy, while a number of loss-of-function mutations in Seipin are associated with the Berardinelli-Seip congenital generalized lipodystrophy type 2 (CGL2, BSCL2), a condition that is characterized by severe lipoatrophy, insulin resistance, and intellectual impairment.
In comparison to liver biopsies of patients with non-viral liver disease, liver biopsies of patients with HCV showed significantly increased mRNA expression of IL-28A and IL-29.
Here, we demonstrate a key regulatory role of IL-28A in T-cell-mediated hepatitis.
IL-28A induced TH1 cytokine production by CD4+ T lymphocytes in a T-bet-dependent manner and was up-regulated in a murine model of T-cell-mediated hepatitis upon Con A administration.
In addition, IL-28A-transgenic mice showed markedly augmented Con A-induced hepatitis with up-regulated interferon-gamma cytokine production, as compared with wild-type mice.
In addition, in vivo blockade of interferon-gamma but not IL-4 suppressed augmented liver inflammation in transgenic mice, suggesting that IL-28A induces the T-bet signaling pathway in T-cell-induced hepatitis.
Thus, targeting of IL-28A represents a potential novel approach for therapy of Th1-mediated inflammatory diseases such as T-cell-mediated hepatitis.
The present study therefore indicated that NOD receptor and TLR9 may modulate the inflammatory response and further impact upon intestinal injury of SAP, via the regulation of NF-KB expression and the oxidation/antioxidation balance, suggesting therapeutically targeting NOD receptor and TLR9 might be a useful approach for the treatment of severe acute pancreatitis.
It also has efficacy in limiting TLR9-mediated sterile inflammation in in vivo models of acute liver injury and acute pancreatitis.
Genetic deletion and pharmacologic antagonism demonstrate that specific DAMP receptors, including Toll-like receptor (TLR) 4, TLR9, and P2X7, are also required for inflammation in experimental acute pancreatitis.
Acute pancreatitis was induced by caerulein stimulation in wild-type mice and mice deficient in components of the inflammasome (apoptosis-associated speck-like protein containing a caspase recruitment domain [ASC], NLRP3, caspase-1), Toll-like receptor 9 (TLR9), or the purinergic receptor P2X(7).
Additionally, wild-type mice were pretreated with a TLR9 antagonist before induction of acute pancreatitis by caerulein or retrograde bile duct infusion of taurolithocholic acid 3-sulfate.
TLR9 and P2X(7) are important DAMP receptors upstream of inflammasome activation, and their antagonism could provide a new therapeutic strategy for treating acute pancreatitis.
We are currently screening the 113 candidate DFNB79 genes for mutations and have excluded CACNA1B, EDF1, PTGDS, EHMT1, QSOX2, NOTCH1, MIR126 and MIR602.
Exposure to bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)-4 was found to enhance a TrkAhigh/CD15-/CD184- neuroblastoma cellular subset, accompanied by a reduction in doublecortin-positive neuroblasts and of NMYC protein expression in SH-SY5Y cells.
Recent studies indicate that C-X-C motif chemokine receptor 4 (CXCR4) and its ligand, C-X-C motif chemokine ligand 12 (CXCL12), stimulate expression of the cell cycle regulatory protein Cyclin D1 in neurofibromatosis 1-associated malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor (MPNST) cells and promote their proliferation.
Western blot analysis revealed the expression of multiple CXCR4 isoforms in neuroblastoma cells.
Our data suggest a modulatory role of the MSC secretome on the expression of the 47 kDa CXCR4 isoform and invasion potential of the neuroblastoma cells to the bone marrow.
In this study, we investigated the role of NF-KB signaling pathway in the regulation of CXC chemokine receptor-4 (CXCR4) in neuroblastoma metastasis.
Targeting NF-KB signalling pathways and ultimately CXCR4 could be a strategy in neuroblastoma therapy.
The FAM3C interleukin-like epithelial-to-mesenchymal-transition (EMT) inducer (ILEI) has been shown to be strongly up-regulated in several cancers and to be essential for tumor formation and metastasis in epithelial cells, correlating with a significant decrease in overall survival in colon and breast cancer patients.
Interleukin-like epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition inducer (ILEI) is an essential cytokine in tumor progression that is upregulated in several cancers, and its altered subcellular localization is a predictor of poor survival in human breast cancer.
Murine mammary tumor and metastasis models of EpC40 and 4T1 cells overexpressing different mutant forms of ILEI were used-extended with in vivo aprotinin treatment for the inhibition of ILEI-processing proteases-to test the in vivo relevance of proteolytic cleavage.
Immunohistochemistry for ILEI localization and uPAR expression was performed on two human breast cancer arrays, and ILEI and uPAR scores were correlated with the metastasis-free survival of patients.
Moreover, altered subcellular ILEI localization strongly correlates with high tumor cell-associated uPAR protein expression, as well as with poor survival, in human breast cancer.
Our findings point out extracellular serine proteases, in particular plasmin, and uPAR as valuable therapeutic targets against ILEI-driven tumor progression and emphasize the prognostic relevance of ILEI localization and a combined ILEI-uPAR marker analysis in human breast cancer.
ILEI is overexpressed and/or altered in intracellular localization in multiple human tumors, an event strongly correlated to invasion/EMT, metastasis formation, and survival in human colon and breast cancer.
Keeping in view the fact that molecular basis of Burkitt's lymphoma (BL) is poorly understood, we attempted to explore the small interfering RNA (siRNA) mediated c-myc gene regulation using BL-derived EB-3 cell line as archetype cellular model.
With other procedures, as anti-complement immunoperoxidase (ACIP) and anti-IgG immunoperoxidase (AIIP) the Epstein-Barr Nuclear Antigen (EBNA) was detected precisely in EB3, Jijoye and Raji lymphocytes using anti-EBNA antibodies from patients with nasopharyngeal carcinoma or Burkitt lymphoma, in dilution 1:10-1:5120.
The virus in the EB-3 cell line derived from a Burkitt lymphoma was partially purified by digestion with proteolytic enzyme and by density-gradient centrifugation on potassium tartrate.
This conjugate proved to be a potent cytotoxin for surface Ig positive Burkitt lymphoma EB-3 cells, growing in vitro and produced 50% inhibition of protein synthesis at level of 1.4 x 10(-9) M. When tested for cytotoxic action on target cells, the composite conjugate molecule was at least 100 times more effective than antibodies alone, ricin A-chain alone or a conjugate ricin A-chain--normal rabbit IgG.
The interaction of poly- and monoclonal antibodies against the L-chain of human Ig with Burkitt lymphoma EB-3 cells was studied using a fluorescent lipid probe, anthrylvinyl-labelled sphingomyelin, incorporated into the cell plasma membrane.
The only gangliosides in Burkitt's lymphoma EB-3 cells is GM3.
Treatment of Burkitt's lymphoma EB-3 cells with gangliosides GM1 or GM3 results in their binding to and partial incorporation into the cell membrane.
We sought to investigate the renoprotection of CIRP in a rat model of deep hypothermic circulatory arrest.
Overexpression and knockdown of CIRP were achieved in vivo by directly injecting lentivirus vectors containing packaging lentivirus (pL)/internal ribosome entry site (IRES)/green fluorescent protein (GFP)-CIRP or pL/short hairpin RNA (shRNA)/F-cold inducible RNA binding protein (F-CIRP)-A into the renal parenchyma of rats 7 days before deep hypothermic circulatory arrest under the ultrasound guidance.
Our findings suggest that the CIRP exerts a robust renoprotective effect by inhibiting apoptosis in the rat model of deep hypothermic circulatory arrest.
Compared with baseline, rats resuscitated from cardiac arrest showed increased expression of CIRP, Bax, Caspase 9, and Caspase 3 and decreased expression of Bcl-2 in hippocampus (P &lt; 0.05).
Our findings suggest that 32 C therapeutic hypothermia exerts an important neuroprotective effects by up-regulating CIRP expression and inhibiting mitochondrial apoptosis factor production in the cardiac arrest rat model.
A previously reported expression signature of three genes (IGFBP3, F3 and VGLL3) was shown to have potential prognostic value in estimating overall and cancer-specific survivals at diagnosis of prostate cancer in a pilot cohort study using freshly frozen Fine Needle Aspiration (FNA) samples.
Multiple biopsy samples from 43 patients were evaluated using a previously reported gene signature of IGFBP3, F3 and VGLL3 with potential prognostic value in estimating overall survival at diagnosis of prostate cancer.
The gene expression levels of IGFBP3 and F3 in prostate cancer epithelial cell-containing tissue representing the primary and secondary Gleason patterns were high and consistent, while the low expressed VGLL3 showed more variation in its expression levels.
Previous studies have implicated vestigial like 3 (VGLL3), a chromosome 3p12.3 gene that encodes a putative transcription co-factor, as a candidate tumor suppressor gene (TSG) in high-grade serous ovarian carcinomas (HGSC), the most common type of epithelial ovarian cancer.
A complementation analysis based on microcell-mediated chromosome transfer (MMCT) using a centric fragment of chromosome 3 (der3p12-q12.1) into the OV-90 ovarian cancer cell line haploinsufficient for 3p and lacking VGLL3 expression was performed to assess the effect on tumorigenic potential and growth characteristics.
Interestingly, underexpression of VGLL3 and ZNF654 were observed in malignant ovarian tumor samples as compared with primary cultures of normal ovarian surface epithelial cells or benign ovarian tumors, and this occurred regardless of allelic content of 3p12.3-pcen.
We tested the effects of the MEK inhibitor RDEA119, the Akt inhibitor perifosine, and the HDAC inhibitor SAHA on NIS expression in thirteen human cancer cell lines derived from melanoma, hepatic carcinoma, gastric carcinoma, colon carcinoma, breast carcinoma, and brain cancers.
Here, we report that escape of human T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) cells or colorectal cancer cells from dormancy is associated with Dll4 expression in the tumor microenvironment and increased Notch3 signaling in tumor cells.
APOBEC1 could be involved in cancer promotion at the very early stages of carcinogenesis, as it is highly expressed in Barrett's esophagus, a condition often associated with esophageal adenocarcinoma.
The differential diagnosis includes Klippel-Trenaunay-Weber syndrome, neurofibromatosis, Milroy disease, and Proteus syndrome.
Notably, new experimental data have shown protective immune responses of bee venom group III sPLA2 against a wide range of diseases including asthma, Parkinson's disease, and drug-induced organ inflammation.
Snake venom are known containing PLA2s (svPLA2s) which exhibit a wide variety of pharmacological effects including neurotoxicity, cardiotoxicity, myotoxicity and hemorrhage.
This study was aimed to assess regulation of surface-membrane enzymes such as Delta-6-desaturase (FADS2), secretory Phospholipase A2(sPLA2) by hemp seed and evening primrose oils as well as Hot-natured dietary intervention in relapsing remitting multiple sclerosis (RRMS) patients.
Phospholipases A2 (PLA2s) are enzymes responsible for inflammatory effects, edema formation, myotoxicity, neurotoxicity and other manifestations from envenoming.
Defects of CIB2, calcium- and integrin-binding protein 2, have been reported to cause isolated deafness, DFNB48 and Usher syndrome type-IJ, characterized by congenital profound deafness, balance defects and blindness.
Here, we report that mutations in CIB2, which encodes a calcium- and integrin-binding protein, are associated with nonsyndromic deafness (DFNB48) and Usher syndrome type 1J (USH1J).
In polymyositis and inclusion body myositis, KIF4 cells were mainly located around individual muscle fibers, whereas in dermatomyositis, they were also near blood vessels.
CD9 expression obviously increased bortezomib sensitivity through inducing apoptosis, significantly inhibiting U266 cells' adhesion to HS-5 and primary bone marrow stromal cells, but increasing U266 cells' adhesion to fibronectin.
The immunoprofiles of MOLP-6 and MOLP-7 correspond to that seen typically in primary MM cells: positive for cytoplasmic immunoglobulin (Ig) chains, a heavy and kappa light chains, CD9, CD28, CD40, CD44, CD45, CD56, and PCA-1; the cells were negative for surface Igs and various other B-cell, T-cell and myelomonocyte associated markers.
The univariate analysis showed that five parameters had an adverse effect on both complete remission (CR) and survival: advanced age (greater than 60 years), anemia (hemoglobin concentration (Hb) less than 10g/dl), the expression of the antigens detected by the anti-megakaryocytic antibodies (CDw41/CDw42), the monocytic antibodies (CD14), and the CD9 (FMC56, FMC8) antigen.
In this review, we consider the following paraneoplastic hormonal syndromes: malign hypercalcaemia, hyponatraemia (inappropiate secretion of the antidiuretic hormone), ectopic Cushing's syndrome, ectopic acromegaly, hypoglycaemia due to tumours different from those of the islet cells and paraneoplastic gynaecomastia; we make a brief final reference to other hormones (calcitonin, somatostatin, and VIP).
Protrudin was found to interact with other HSP-related proteins including myelin proteolipid protein 1 (SPG2), atlastin-1 (SPG3A), REEP1 (SPG31), REEP5 (similar to REEP1), Kif5A (SPG10), Kif5B, Kif5C, and reticulon 1, 3, and 4 (similar to reticulon 2, SPG12).
Downregulation of ACE2 is always associated with the ALI or ARDS induced by avian influenza virus, severe acute respiratory syndrome-coronavirus, respiratory syncytial virus and sepsis.
A virus infection assay showed that rWIV1-DeltaX replicated as efficiently as rWIV1 in Vero E6, Calu-3, and HeLa-hACE2 cells.
Results show that 106 cases of tetanus occurred in Aceh, with a case fatality ratio (CFR) of 18.9%; 71 cases occurred in Yogyakarta, with CFR of 36.6%.
Treatment of (DR-BB x WF)F1 x WF animals (all lyp+/+) using a standard induction protocol caused type 1 diabetes in 58% of progeny.
All genetic analyses of BB rat diabetes to date have backcrossed to the DP-BB strain or used (DP-BB x non-BB)F2 animals to ensure that a fraction of progeny are homozygous for lyp.
Since, type 1 diabetes is characterised by hyperglycaemia we analysed 22 diabetic and 43 non-diabetic [(BB x SHR)FI x BB] backcross hybrids (28M:37F) which were already homozygous for Iddml and Iddm2 to search for quantitative trait loci (QTLs) affecting blood glucose in BB/OK rats.
This prompted us to investigate the inheritance of IDDM in two subpopulations of BB rats (BB/OK and BB/PhiK) by crossing studies with the production of (diabetic BB x LEW 1.A) F1, F2 generations and of first backcross hybrids onto BB (B1BB) and LEW.1A (B1A) rats respectively.
LRRK2 selectively interacts with three Beta-tubulin isoforms: TUBB, TUBB4, and TUBB6, one of which (TUBB4) is mutated in the movement disorder dystonia type 4 (DYT4).
In this study, we aimed to analyze pairwise interactions that are associated with Body Mass Index (BMI) between SNPs from twelve genes robustly associated with obesity (BDNF, ETV5, FAIM2, FTO, GNPDA2, KCTD15, MC4R, MTCH2, NEGR1, SEC16B, SH2B1, and TMEM18).
In total, 15 loci reached genome-wide significance (P-value &lt; 5 x 10(-8)) in the joint discovery and replication analysis, of which 12 are previously identified loci in or close to ADCY3, GNPDA2, TMEM18, SEC16B, FAIM2, FTO, TFAP2B, TNNI3K, MC4R, GPR61, LMX1B and OLFM4 associated with adult body mass index or childhood obesity.
An obesity-related gene, Fas apoptotic inhibitory molecule 2 (FAIM2), is regulated by nutritional state and the methylation levels of the FAIM2 promoter are significantly associated with obesity.
Whether the molecular mechanisms by which FAIM2 affects obesity are involved in lifestyle is unclear.
Our results suggest that lifestyle may possibly be mediating the process of the FAIM2 involved in obesity.
Fas apoptotic inhibitory molecule 2 (FAIM2) is an obesity-related gene, but the mechanisms by which FAIM2 is involved in obesity are not understood.
The purpose of this study was to investigate the potential associations of FAIM2 promoter methylation with obesity and components of dyslipidaemia in Chinese children.
This study provides the first evidence that the methylation levels of the FAIM2 promoter are significantly associated with obesity and are independently associated with dyslipidaemia and its components in Chinese children.
The association of FTO rs9939609-A, MC4R rs17782313-C, GNPDA2 rs10938397-G, and FAIM2 rs7138803-A with higher BMI, fat mass percentage, waist circumference, and waist-to height ratio and risk of obesity, and BDNF rs6265-G allele may increase BMI and obesity risk in Chinese children.
Here we aim to see whether variants in obesity-associated genes--NEGR1, FTO, MTCH2, MC4R, LRRN6C, MAP2K5, FAIM2, SEC16B, ETV5, BDNF-AS, ATXN2L, ATP2A1, KCTD15, and TNN13K--are associated with white matter microstructural properties, assessed by high angular resolution diffusion imaging (HARDI) in young healthy adults between 20 and 30 years of age from the Queensland Twin Imaging study (QTIM).
Our results reflect an epigenetic regulation of Rbl2/p130 expression in breast cancer.
This highlights the importance of Rbl2/p130 promoter methylation in breast cancer pathogenesis.
Here, we report that ER-beta and pRb2/p130 proteins co-immunoprecipitate in both nucleus and cytoplasm of MCF-7 breast cancer cells.
Here we show a new molecular mechanism of ER-alpha gene inactivation mediated by pRb2/p130 in ER-negative breast cancer cells.
These findings suggest that pRb2/p130-multimolecular complexes can be key elements in the regulation of ER-alpha gene expression and may be viewed as promising targets for the development of novel therapeutic strategies in the treatment of breast cancer, especially for those tumors that are ER negative.
In order to further analyze the role of CEACAM1 in the development of breast cancer, we performed Western-blot analysis and immunohistochemistry with highly specific monoclonal antibodies in a cohort of 68 mammary carcinomas which had also been analyzed for expression of cell-cycle regulatory proteins cyclin D1, cyclin E, p16, p21, p27, Rb, and Rb2, as well as for steroid hormone receptor status, Ki67, and HER2/neu immunoreactivity.
Weak or absent Rb2 expression was more often found in endometrial (59%) than in mammary carcinomas (24%).
We found significant positive correlations of Rb2 expression with Rb, ER, and PR-B in breast cancer samples, and of Rb2 with Rb, PR-A, PR-B, and younger age in endometrial carcinomas.
Our results indicate that loss of Rb2 expression, mostly by transcriptional down-regulation, may be associated with the development and dedifferentiation of most endometrial and a subset of mammary carcinomas.
We have developed a novel glycocancer biomarker, fucosylated haptoglobin (Fuc-Hpt), and have investigated its usefulness for the diagnosis of pancreatic cancer over approximately 10 years.
In this review, we provide a historical summary of our research on Fuc-Hpt as a cancer biomarker, and discuss a potential early detection system for pancreatic cancer.
We developed a lectin-antibody ELISA kit using PhoSL to determine core-Fuc-Hpt levels in sera from colorectal or pancreatic cancer patients.
Serum levels of AAL-reactive Hpt are higher in pancreatic cancer patients, whereas those of PhoSL-reactive Hpt are higher in colorectal cancer patients.
Fucosylated haptoglobin (Fuc-Hpt) has been identified as a novel biomarker for pancreatic cancer.
We previously found that the level of Fuc-Hpt is increased in the sera of patients with pancreatic cancer, and established a lectin antibody ELISA using Aleuria aurantia lectin, which specifically binds to fucosylated residues on oligosaccharides.
Using the model checking method, we verified several Alzheimer's disease and cancer-related properties, and also identified important proteins (NFKB, ATF4, ASK1 and TRAF2) in the ER-Golgi network, which might be responsible for the pathogenesis of cancer and AD.
We genotyped 107 AIH-1 children and up to 326 healthy subjects for TNFA G-308A, TNFA G-238A, LTA A+252G, LTA A+80C, NFKBIL1 T-63A, BAT1 C-348T, BAT1 G-22C, MICA, and HLA-B polymorphisms.
Tandem repeats of a novel, putative, zinc-binding motif (MYM) have been described within the products of two, highly homologous genes: ZNF198/RAMP/FIM and ZNF261/DXS6673E.
From 2005 to 2010, our unit performed testing for IL2RG, JAK3, IL7R, RAG1, RAG2, DCLRE1C, LIG4, AK2, and ZAP70 mutations in 42 Chinese and Southeast Asian infants with SCID adopting a candidate gene approach, based on patient's gender, immune phenotype, and inheritance pattern.
Mutations were identified in 26 patients, including IL2RG (n = 19), IL7R (n = 2), JAK3 (n = 2), RAG1 (n = 1), RAG2 (n = 1), and DCLRE1C (n = 1).
Mutations in any of eight known genes: IL2RG, ARTEMIS, RAG1, RAG2, ADA, CD45, JAK3, and IL7R cause SCID.
Previous studies have reported that Nit2, a member of the nitrilase superfamily, is a potential tumor suppressor, although its function remains elusive in colon cancer.
In the present study, we employed an RNA interference lentivirus system to silence endogenous NIT2 expression in the colon cancer cell line, HCT116.
The depletion of NIT2 markedly inhibited colon cancer cell proliferation and colony formation and induced cell cycle arrest in the G0/G1 phase, as shown by MTT assay, colony formation assay and flow cytometric analysis, respectively.
Further investigation with an intracellular signaling array demonstrated that the depletion of NIT2 triggered the apoptosis of colon cancer cells through the caspase-3 and poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) pathways.
Our findings suggest that NIT2 may be an oncogene in human colon cancer and may thus serve as a promising therapeutic target for the treatment of colon cancer.
Our report may provide clues regarding the nature of the biological amidase substrate(s) of Nit1 (another member of the Nit family), which is a well-established tumor suppressor protein), and emphasizes a) the crucial role of Nit2 in nitrogen and sulfur metabolism, and b) the possible link of Nit2 to cancer biology.
The purpose of this study was to retrospectively characterize benign and malignant prostate peripheral zone tissue by using endorectal MRI and 3D 1H MRS. Fifty-two men with untreated biopsy-proven prostate cancer underwent combined endorectal MRI and MRSI.
The addition of 3D1H MRSI to MRI can improve diagnosis of prostate cancer contributing indirectly to improve local staging.
In addition, the correlation between metabolic 3D1H MRSI data with pathological Gleason grade may offer a non-invasive means to better predict prostate cancer aggressiveness.
The objective of our study was to establish the sensitivity and specificity for prostate cancer detection using a combined 1H MR spectroscopy and diffusion-weighted MRI approach.
MRI, dynamic MRI, and 1H-MR spectroscopic imaging were performed in 10 patients with prostate cancer on 1.5T and 3T whole-body scanners.
Initial results of endorectal 3T 1H-MR spectroscopic imaging in prostate cancer patients showed potential advantages: the increase in spatial, temporal, and spectral resolution at higher field strength may result in an improved accuracy in delineating and staging prostate cancer.
To establish an experimental setting for monitoring perfusion and metabolism in orthotopic prostate cancer at 1.5 T using dynamic contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (DCE MRI) and 1H-MR spectroscopy (MRS).
DCE MRI and 1H-MRS has potential to characterize orthotopic Dunning prostate cancer in rats, which is a promising model similar to human prostate carcinomas.
We recently characterized a stress and glucocorticoid-regulated gene, down-regulated in renal cell carcinoma - DRR1 (Fam107A).
TU3A, located on 3p21.1, was originally identified as a candidate tumor suppressor gene in renal cell carcinoma (RCC).
In our search for tumor suppressor genes from this region, we have cloned a gene that we have called DRR 1 (downregulated in renal cell carcinoma).
Our results suggest that loss of expression of the DRR 1 gene may play an important role in the development of renal cell carcinoma and possibly other tumors.
E2F5 was identified as one of the most deregulated genes in prostate cancer tissues, predominantly in samples with Gleason-score 6.
Function of E2F5 and p38 in prostate cancer was investigated using siRNA-treatment of PC3 cell-line followed by analyses of associated components and cell cycle.
Our findings unearthed that E2F5/p38 axis played a cardinal role in uncontrolled cellular proliferation in prostate cancer through pSMAD3L activation.
It also underscores a strong potential for E2F5 to be incorporated as a tool in early detection of prostate cancer.
We report the coexistence of otitis media and epididymo-orchitis owing to Hemophilus influenzae, type b in 2 children.
Overexpression of tau rescued the Nogo-66-induced inhibition of neurite outgrowth in neuroblastoma 2a (N2a) cells and primary cortical neurons.
Taken together, we suggest that Nogo-A is closely involved in the neuronal response to hypoxic and oxidative stress, an observation that may be of relevance not only in stroke-induced ischaemia, but also in neuroblastoma formation.
In the present study, we report on the role of GSK-3Beta signaling on Nogo-66-treated mouse neuroblastoma N2a cells.
Brain-derived neurotrophic factor stimulates the phosphorylation, suppressing Nogo-dependent inhibition of neurite outgrowth from neuroblastoma-derived neural cells.
In our per-SNP analysis, eight myopia gene associations were replicated successfully: GJD2, RASGRF1, BICC1, KCNQ5, CD55, CYP26A1, LRRC4C, and B4GALNT2.Seven additional gene associations were replicated in our gene-based analyses: GRIA4, BMP2, QKI, BMP4, SFRP1, SH3GL2, and EHBP1L1.
The aims of the present study were to immunohistochemically examine S100A10 expression in surgically resected lung adenocarcinomas, and evaluate any relationships with clinicopathological parameters and prognosis of patients.
S100A10 expression was immunohistochemically studied in 202 consecutive resected lung adenocarcinomas, and its associations with clinicopathological parameters were evaluated.
S100A10 expression was detected in 65 of the 202 (32.2%) lung adenocarcinomas, being significantly correlated with poorer differentiation (P =0.015), a higher pathological TNM stage (stages II and III) (P=0.004), more frequent and severe intratumoral vascular invasion (P=0.001), and a poorer prognosis (P=0.030).
The present study reveals that S100A10 is expressed in a subset of lung adenocarcinomas, and this is related to some clinicopathological parameters, although further studies are required to confirm the correlation between S100A10 expression and prognosis of lung adenocarcinoma patients.
Using mass spectrometry for protein identification and validating the results by immunohistochemistry on an independent validation set, we could identify two of 60 differentially expressed m/z species between Barrett's adenocarcinoma and the precursor lesion: COX7A2 and S100-A10.
In the validation set, we found a correlation of the expression levels of COX7A2 and TAGLN2 with a poor prognosis while S100-A10 was confirmed by multivariate analysis as a novel independent prognostic factor in Barrett's adenocarcinoma.
S100A10, a member of the S100 family, forms a heterotetramer with annexin IIH and promotes carcinoma invasion and metastasis by plasminogen activation.
Cells stained positively in 14.6% and 20.8% of follicular carcinomas for S100A10 and annexin II, respectively, but their expression levels were always low.
S100A10 and annexin II were expressed in all papillary carcinomas, but 88.2% and 82.8% ofpapillary carcinomas were classified in the low group.
These findings suggest that S100A10 and annexin II contribute to the aggressive characteristics of anaplastic carcinoma, while playing a constitutive role in papillary carcinoma.
The spin-labeled derivative of podophyllotoxin, N'-podophyllic acid-N-[3-(2,2,5,5-tetramethyl pyrrolinenyloxy)] semicarbazide (GP-11), was synthesized and tested for its antitumor activity against mouse transplantable tumors, Sarcoma-180, Hepatoma-A, P388 leukemia and Ehrlich ascites carcinoma.
Remote parenchymal hemorrhage (rPH) after intravenous thrombolysis with recombinant tissue-type plasminogen activator may be associated with cerebral amyloid angiopathy, although supportive data are limited.
We here review the data with respect to the activation of tPA by fibrin and its multiple other cofactors, in relation to tPA's role in pathophysiology, notably fibrinolysis and amyloidosis, with emphasis on Alzheimer's disease.
Cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA) may be an important predisposing factor for the hemorrhagic complications of recombinant tissue-type plasminogen activator (rt-PA) therapy.
The purpose of this study was to investigate the potential of intranasal immunization with non-ionic surfactant vesicles (NISV) containing either the secretory recombinant form of glycoprotein B (gBs) of herpes simplex virus type 1 or a related polylysine reach peptides (DTK) for induction of protective immunity against genital herpes infection in mice.
Seventeen molecules, including transcription factor E2F, T-cell-specific transcription factor, Src (known as "proto-oncogene tyrosine-protein kinase of sarcoma"), interferon regulatory factor 1, thymidylate synthase, cyclin B, cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) 4, CDK, caspase-1, vitamin D receptor, histone deacetylase, MAPK/ERK kinase, bcl-2-associated X protein, runt-related transcription factor 1, PR domain zinc finger protein 1, platelet-derived growth factor receptor, and interleukin 1, were identified as candidate molecules.
The IRF-1 priming of TEXs enhances antitumour immune response.British Journal of Cancer advance online publication, 7 November 2017; doi:10.1038/bjc.2017.389 www.bjcancer.com.
Interferon regulatory factor 1 (IRF1) has been suggested to act as a tumor suppressor in human cancers.
However, the clinical significance and biological function of IRF1 in cholangiocarcinoma is poorly understood.
In our results, IRF1 mRNA and protein expressions were decreased in cholangiocarcinoma tissues and cell lines compared with paired normal hepatic tissues and intrahepatic bile duct epithelial cell line.
IRF1 protein low-expression was associated with tumor stage, tumor size, vascular invasion and metastasis and served as a poor independent prognostic parameter in cholangiocarcinoma patients.
Up-regulation of IRF1 expression suppressed cholangiocarcinoma cells proliferation, migration and invasion, and blocked cell cycle progression, but has no effect on apoptosis.
In conclusion, IRF1 is low-expressed in cholangiocarcinoma tissues and cell lines, and correlated with malignant status and prognosis in cholangiocarcinoma patients.
IRF1 served as tumor suppressor in the regulation of cholangiocarcinoma cells proliferation, cell cycle, migration and invasion.
To examine genetic defects of the IFNGamma-IRF1 pathway in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), we analyzed The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) lung adenocarcinoma (LuAd) and lung squamous cell carcinoma (LuSc) data.
IRF1 expression was correlated with immune cytolytic activity markers GZMA and PRF1 in NSCLC.
Deletion of JAK2 or inhibition of the JAK2 kinase activity resulted in loss of IFNGamma-induced IRF1 and cell surface HLA-ABC in JAK2 wildtype NSCLC cells, whereas expression of exogenous JAK2 in H1573 cells restored the IFNGamma responses.
These findings show that JAK2 deficiency is the major mechanism of genetic defects of the IFNGamma-IRF1 pathway in NSCLC and reveal a previously unrecognized significance of chromosome 9p deletion in NSCLC.
The performance of the GeneXpert(R) Bladder Cancer Assay, an assay labeled for investigational use only to detect the 5 mRNAs ABL1, CRH, IGF2, ANXA10 and UPK1B, was evaluated in an independent test cohort of 450 participants.
Our previous mass spectrometry-based proteomics study revealed that annexin A10 (ANXA10) was uniquely overexpressed in pancreatic CD24+ adenocarcinoma cells that were dissected from clinical PDAC tissues but was absent in CD24- adjacent normal cells.
The correlation between ANXA10 expression and the progression of pancreatic cancer remains unknown.
In this study, we performed an immunostaining assay to evaluate ANXA10 expression in 155 primary human tissue specimens, including normal pancreas, chronic pancreatitis (CP), pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PDAC), pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PanIN, the most important precursor of PDAC), and intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (IPMN).
Since PDAC develops through a series of PanINs which in turn arise from pancreatic ducts, the consistent overexpression of ANXA10 in ductal epithelial cells in PanINs and PDACs but negative in normal pancreatic ducts suggests that ANXA10 could serve as a potential marker indicating the presence of PDAC at its earliest precancerous stages.
In this study, we evaluated the effects of simvastatin on ANXA10 signaling in androgen-independent prostate cancer cells.
In human prostate biopsy samples, ANXA10 mRNA expression was significantly lower in the prostate cancer group than in the BPH group.
Next, we found that up-regulation of ANXA10 in PC-3 resulted in down-regulation of S100 calcium binding protein A4 (S100A4), which is reportedly correlated with aggressiveness and a worse prognosis for patients with different types of carcinomas.
Our results suggest that statins inhibit the proliferation, migration, and invasion of androgen-independent prostate cancer cells by up-regulation of ANXA10.
Immunohistochemistry for 7 gastric-type markers (ANXA10, VSIG1, CLDN18, CTSE, TFF2, MUC5AC, and MUC6) and 2 intestinal-type markers (CDX2 and CK20) was performed in 36 normal gastric/colorectal mucosa tissues, 163 colorectal polyps, and 175 microsatellite-unstable colorectal carcinomas (MSI-H CRCs).
Two decades ago, Galectin-8 was described as a prostate carcinoma biomarker since it is only expressed in the neoplastic prostate, but not in the healthy tissue.
In this study we silenced Galectin-8 in two human prostate cancer cell lines, PC3 and IGR-CaP1, and designed a pre-clinical experimental model that allows monitoring the pathology from its early steps to the long-term metastatic stages.
We show for the first time that the natural and conserved expression of Gal-8 in tumour cells is responsible for the metastatic evolution of prostate cancer.
Collectively, our results highlight Galectin-8 as a potential target for anti-metastatic therapy against prostate cancer.
Immunocytochemistry for prostate carcinoma tumour antigen (PCTA-1) was performed for culture purity evaluation.
Galectin-8 levels of expression positively correlate with certain human neoplasms, prostate cancer being the best example studied thus far.
The Prostate Carcinoma Tumor Antigen-1 (PCTA-1) is located at the prostate cancer susceptibility locus on chromosome 1q42.2-43 (PCaP).
Seventy-seven familial prostate cancer cases from 36 German and French pedigrees were screened for germline mutations in the PCTA-1 gene using enzymatic mutation detection (EMD).
PCTA-1 is not a classical high risk gene with deleterious mutations predisposing to hereditary prostate cancer.
The isolation of Prostate Carcinoma Tumor Antigen-1 (PCTA-1), a cDNA closely related to rat and human Galectin-8, as a surface marker associated with prostate cancer was achieved using a previously described immunological subtraction approach, Surface Epitope Masking (SEM) approach, in combination with expression screening.
PCTA-1 maps to 1q42-43, a locus associated with predisposition to prostate cancer.
Screening a human LNCaP prostate cancer cDNA expression library with the Pro 1.5 mAb identifies a gene, prostate carcinoma tumor antigen-1 (PCTA-1).
Primer pairs within the 3' untranslated region of PCTA-1 and reverse transcription-PCR demonstrate selective expression of PCTA-1 by prostate carcinomas versus normal prostate and benign prostatic hypertrophy.
Moreover, Foxp3 could interact with LMO2 and affect the expression level of TAL1, which was in accordance with the findings in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.
Overexpression of LMO2 is known to be one of the causes of T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) development; however, the mechanisms behind its oncogenic activity are incompletely understood.
Expression of LMO2 has been evaluated in B-cell lymphoma, T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia and acute myeloid leukemia; however, information concerning its role in breakpoint cluster region/Abelson murine leukemia viral oncogene homolog 1 (BCR/ABL) negative B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL) remains limited.
Oncogenic transcription factors are commonly activated in acute leukemias and subvert normal gene expression networks to reprogram hematopoietic progenitors into preleukemic stem cells, as exemplified by LIM-only 2 (LMO2) in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL).
T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) frequently involves aberrant expression of TAL1 (T-cell acute lymphocytic leukemia 1) and LMO2, oncogenic members of the TAL1 transcriptional complex.
Lmo2 is an oncogenic transcription factor that is frequently overexpressed in T-cell acute leukemias, in particular poor prognosis early T-cell precursor-like (ETP-) acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL).
Participants (N = 4,901) were from Look AHEAD, a randomized controlled trial that compared ILI to diabetes support and education (DSE).
A multidomain intensive lifestyle intervention (ILI) to induce weight loss and increase physical activity for 8 to 11 years or diabetes support and education (DSE), a control condition.
Overweight and obese (BMI &gt;=25 kg/m 2) middle-aged and older adults (aged 45-76 years at enrollment) with type 2 diabetes enrolled in Look AHEAD, a trial evaluating an intensive lifestyle intervention (ILI) designed to achieve weight loss through caloric restriction and increased physical activity compared to diabetes support and education (DSE), underwent standardized assessments of performance-based physical function including a 4- and 400-m walk, lower extremity physical performance (expanded Short Physical Performance Battery, SPPBexp), and grip strength approximately 11 years post-randomization and 1.5 years after the intervention was stopped (n=3,783).
To address the unique nature of prions, our group targets epitopes, termed disease specific epitopes (DSEs), whose exposure for antibody binding depends on disease-associated misfolding of PrPC into PrPSc.
During 5 years spanning the end of intervention and post-intervention follow-up, repeated cognitive assessments were obtained in 1,091 individuals who had been assigned to ILI or a control condition of diabetes support and education (DSE).
A total of 5145 persons aged 45 to 76 years with DM were randomized to either an intensive lifestyle intervention (ILI) with reduced calorie consumption and increased physical activity designed to achieve and maintain &gt;=7% weight loss or to diabetes support and education intervention (DSE).
The purpose of this study was to assess range of motion (ROM), pain, and incidence of radiographic degenerative joint disease (DJD) after volar radioscapholunate (RSL) arthrodesis and distal scaphoidectomy (DSE) following malunited distal radius fractures (DRF).
Fourteen patients with malunited DRF and DJD limited to the radiocarpal joint underwent RSL arthrodesis and DSE between 2006 and 2014.
The impact of a static electric field (EF) on amyloid peptide aggregation has been much less studied, although EFs may have some applications to treat Parkinson's disease symptoms.
Cognitive impairments occur frequently and early in multiple sclerosis (MS) and contribute significantly to a reduced quality of life of patients with MS. Executive functions (EFs) play a pivotal role for the behavioral adaption to the environment and are also crucial for compensatory processes of cognitive impairments.
Several recent studies have pointed out that early impairment of executive functions (EFs) in Parkinson's Disease (PD) may be a crucial marker to detect patients at risk for developing dementia.
Importantly, analysis of circulating EVs from plasma of alcoholic hepatitis patients revealed increased numbers of EVs that contained high levels of miR-27a as compared with healthy controls.
The following associations were found: auto-immune thyroid disease (4.3% of DH patients and 6.0% of CD patients), insulin dependent diabetes (1.0% DH and 5.5% CD), lupus erythematosus (1.3% DH and 0.3% CD), Sjoegren's syndrome (1.0% DH and 2.9% CD), sarcoidosis (1.3% DH and 1.8% CD), and vitiligo or alopecia areata (1.6% DH and 0% CD).
Rarely, an association of parkinsonism with PN may be encountered in other neurodegenerative diseases such as fragile X-associated tremor and ataxia syndrome related to premutation CGG repeat expansion in the fragile X mental retardation (FMR1) gene, Machado-Joseph disease related to an abnormal CAG repeat expansion in ataxin-3 (ATXN3) gene, Kufor-Rakeb syndrome caused by mutations in ATP13A2 gene, or in hereditary systemic disorders such as Gaucher disease due to mutations in the Beta-glucocerebrosidase (GBA) gene and Chediak-Higashi syndrome due to LYST gene mutations.
We also identified the mutation of the LYST gene, that is causative gene for Chediak-Higashi syndrome, for the autosomal recessive complicated spastic paraplegia with cerebellar ataxia and neuropathy.
To our knowledge, this is the first study on spina bifida to determine the nucleotide sequences of breakpoints for trisomy 2p24.3-pter and monosomy 5p14.3-pter.
Our report serves to emphasize the consistency in the prenatal sonographic feature of spina bifida in consecutive pregnancies with fetuses associated with partial trisomy 3q (3q26.1-qter) and partial monosomy 5p (5p13.33-pter).
These are classified into ten different types (NDNC1-10), which are described in OMIM.1 The genes described for isolated nail disorders include PLCD1 (MIM 602142), RSPO4 (MIM 610573), FZD6 (MIM 603409), COL7A1 (MIM 120120), HPGD (MIM 601688) and SLCO2A1 (MIM 601460).
Anonychia/hyponychia congenita is a rare autosomal recessive developmental disorder characterized by the absence (anonychia) or hypoplasia (hyponuchia) of finger- and/or toenails frequently caused by mutations in the R-spondin 4 (RSPO4) gene.
Because there were no other congenital abnormalities, this was considered to be anonychia congenita; probably caused by a recessive defect of the R-spondin 4-coding gene.
To investigate whether receipt of any antithrombin concentrate improves laboratory and clinical outcomes in children undergoing extracorporeal membrane oxygenation for respiratory failure during their hospitalization compared with those who did not receive antithrombin.
Intermittent, on-demand dosing of antithrombin concentrate in pediatric patients on extracorporeal membrane oxygenation for respiratory failure increased antithrombin levels, but not typically to the targeted level.
We hypothesized that combining intravenous recombinant human antithrombin (rhAT), nebulized heparin, and nebulized tissue plasminogen activator (TPA) more effectively improves pulmonary gas exchange compared with a single rhAT infusion, while maintaining the anti-inflammatory properties of rhAT in ARDS.
After 12 months, bonds fell from 43.9 +/- 9.5 MPa to 20.1 +/- 5.4 MPa and from 39.6 +/- 9.4 MPa to 14.2 +/- 5.0 MPa in control specimens for SB1 and XPB respectively, while bond fell only from 41.9 +/- 9.6MPa to 33.2 +/- 8.3 MPa and 38.3 +/- 8.9 MPa to 26.5 +/- 10.9 (for SB1 and XPB, respectively) when 0.2% CHX was previously used.
Primary SFs from patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) were treated with recombinant human bone morphogenetic protein-2 or transduced with a constitutively active mutant of the ALK3 gene (ALK3CA) with or without TNF-Alfa, and then cultured in pellets.
We describe a patient with ALK-negative ALCL presenting with clinical and radiographic findings suggesting osteomyelitis 6 months after left rotator cuff repair surgery.
We compared levels of GABA(B) receptor subunits GABA(B) receptor 1 (GABBR1) and GABA(B) receptor 2 (GABBR2) in cerebellum, Brodmann's area 9 (BA9), and BA40 of subjects with autism and matched controls.
Sclerosteosis is caused by loss-of-function mutations in the SOST gene which encodes a secreted glycoprotein, sclerostin.
VBD is caused by a noncoding deletion that removes a SOST-specific regulatory element in bone.
Here we describe how human genetics studies in sclerosteosis and VBD patients, in combination with the generation of transgenic and knockout mice, has led to a better understanding of the role of sclerostin in bone metabolism.
In addition, expression of SOST is delayed or suppressed; resulting in active WNT signaling and enhanced periosteal bone formation, and the combined outcome is generalized hyperostosis.
Initially, we and others reported that sclerosteosis was caused by loss-of-function mutations in SOST, encoding sclerostin.
More recently, we identified disease-causing mutations in LRP4, a binding partner of sclerostin, in three sclerosteosis patients.
The positive correlation we found between sclerostin and age in Paget disease of bone patients indicates that in comparative studies, sclerostin serum levels must be adjusted for age.
Sclerosteosis and van Buchem disease are two rare bone sclerosing dysplasias caused by genetic defects in the synthesis of sclerostin.
In this article we review the demographic, clinical, biochemical, radiological, and histological characteristics of patients with sclerosteosis and van Buchem disease that led to a better understanding of the role of sclerostin in bone metabolism in humans and we discuss the relevance of these findings for the development of new therapeutics for the treatment of patients with osteoporosis.
After discovering that lack of Sost/sclerostin expression is the cause of the high bone mass human syndromes Van Buchem disease and sclerosteosis, extensive animal experimentation and clinical studies demonstrated that sclerostin plays a critical role in bone homeostasis and that its deficiency or pharmacological neutralization increases bone formation.
Loss-of-function mutations of the sclerostin gene (SOST) cause sclerosteosis and Van Buchem disease characterized by bone overgrowth.
Mutations in the human sclerostin gene (SOST) lead to sclerosteosis with progressive skeletal overgrowth, whereas sclerostin-deficient (Sost(-/-)) mice exhibit increased bone mass and strength.
Therefore, this study provides additional support to develop OGA inhibitors as a treatment for Alzheimer's disease and other neurodegenerative tauopathies.
To identify the association between gastrointestinal carcinomas (GIC) risk and UDP-glucuronosyltransferases (UGTs) 1A7 polymorphisms through a systematic review and network meta-analysis.
In this study, the expression and regulation of two androgen-inactivating enzymes, the UDP-glucuronosyltransferases UGT2B15 and UGT2B17, was assessed in breast cancer.
Global ablation of INSL3 hormone or its receptor RXFP2 in male mice results in cryptorchidism and infertility.
We have also produced shRNA transgenic mice with reduced RXFP2 expression Such males manifested various degree of uni- and bilateral cryptorchidism.
To study the consequences of an aberrant testicular environment in cryptorchidism we used a mouse model with a deletion of Rxfp2 gene resulting in a high intra-abdominal testicular position.
Deletion of Insl3 or Rxfp2 genes in mice caused cryptorchidism resulting from a failure of gubernaculum development.
Using Cre transgene driven by retinoic acid receptor beta promoter, conditional gene targeting in gubernacular mesenchymal cells at early embryonic stages caused high intraabdominal cryptorchidism as in males with a global deletion of Rxfp2.
Prenatal exposure to diethylstilbestrol affected the expression of LGR8 mRNA in the mouse gubernaculum testis, which suggests that diethylstilbestrol may induce cryptorchidism by interfering with the INSL3-LGR8 signaling system and consequently the development of the gubernaculum testis.
Prospectively collected cremaster muscle and/or hernia sac tissues from boys with congenital (79) or acquired (66) nonsyndromic cryptorchidism and hernia/hydrocele (controls, 84) were analyzed for hormone receptor (RXFP2, AR, ESR1, ESR2) and myosin heavy chain specific (MYH1, MYH2, MYH7) mRNA expression using real-time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction.
Exon sequencing of candidate genes identified mutations in mice with cystic kidneys (Bicc1), cryptorchidism (Rxfp2), restricted germ cell deficiency (Plk4), and severe germ cell deficiency (Prdm9).
Patients with definite pneumonia at the time of admission, those with left-sided heart failure, pulmonary embolism and an identifiable cause of acute lung injury, and those whose albumin or C-reactive protein levels were not measured were excluded.
We have identified a hypoxia-induced pathway that utilizes the Hypoxia Inducible Factor 1Alfa (HIF-1Alfa) transcription factor and the JAK1/2-STAT3 (Janus Kinase 1/2 - Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription 3) axis to enhance the self-renewal of glioma stem-like cells.
Analyzing gene expression signatures in endometrial and stomach adenocarcinomas revealed that tumors with a JAK1 frameshift exhibited reduced expression of interferon response signatures and multiple anti-tumor immune signatures.
From these data, we derive two primary conclusions: 1) JAK1 frameshifts are loss of function alterations that represent a potential pan-cancer adaptation to immune responses against tumors with microsatellite instability; 2) The mechanism by which JAK1 loss of function contributes to tumor immune evasion is likely associated with loss of the JAK1-mediated interferon response.
MAJIC (ISRCTN61925716) is a randomized phase 2 trial of ruxolitinib (JAK1/2 inhibitor) vs best available therapy (BAT) in ET and polycythemia vera patients resistant or intolerant to HC.
Fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva (FOP) is a rare autosomal dominant disorder that is characterized by episodic yet cumulative heterotopic ossification (HO) in skeletal muscles, tendons, and ligaments over a patient's lifetime.
Gain-of-function mutations in the Type I Bone Morphogenic Protein (BMP) receptor ACVR1 have been identified in two diseases: Fibrodysplasia Ossificans Progressiva (FOP), a rare autosomal dominant disorder characterized by genetically driven heterotopic ossification, and in 20-25% of Diffuse Intrinsic Pontine Gliomas (DIPGs), a pediatric brain tumor with no effective therapies and dismal median survival.
Fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva is an autosomal dominant disorder due to germline mutations of ACVR1/ALK2 causing progressive heterotopic endochondral ossifications.
It is an autosomal dominant disease, usually caused by a new mutation in the ACVR1 receptor gene, which is in the signaling pathway for bone morphogenic protein.
Fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva (FOP), characterized by congenital malformation of bones, is an autosomal dominant disorder.
Fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva (FOP) is a rare autosomal dominant disorder characterized by progressive heterotopic ossification in skeletal muscle tissue.
Fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva (FOP) is a rare autosomal dominant disorder characterized by progressive heterotopic ossification.
Loss of ORAI1 function is linked with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and hence pharmacological blockers of ORAI1 could be potential therapeutic agents for the treatment of RA.
To determine whether Ca(2+) release-activated Ca(2+) (CRAC) channels contribute to the abnormal behaviour of T cells in patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA), we performed a cross-sectional study to characterize the expression and functional status of CRACM1 channels in RA patients.
Since autoreactive T cells play an important role in the development of autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis, multiple sclerosis, and organ transplantation, Orai1 becomes an attractive therapeutic target for ameliorating autoimmune disease.
Our results demonstrate that a few point mutations in the Lol p 5 sequence yield mutants with reduced allergenic activity that represent potential vaccine candidates for immunotherapy of grass pollen allergy.
Herein we present data relative to the effect of knocking down BCKDK gene on the real time oxygen consumption rate of fibroblasts obtained from a Maple Syrup Urine Disease (MSUD) patient.
Data relative to the effectiveness of the knockdown together with the potentiality of the BCKDK-knockdown to increase the deficient branched-chain Alfa-ketoacid dehydrogenase activity detected in MSUD patients are also shown.
In the study, 800 patients with coronary artery disease, cerebrovascular disease, or peripheral artery disease (PAD) or multiple cardiovascular risk factors (MRF) were recruited.
To obtain Western European perspectives on the economic burden of atherothrombosis in patients with multiple risk factors only (MRF), cerebrovascular disease (CVD), coronary artery disease (CAD), and in the under-evaluated group of patients with peripheral arterial disease (PAD), we examined vascular-related hospitalisation rates and associated costs in France and Germany.
The stroke relationships of a Chinese character reflect its structure, which can be statistically represented by the neighborhood system and clique potentials within the MRF framework.
We penalize the structurally mismatched stroke relationships with MRFs using the prior clique potentials, and derive the likelihood clique potentials from Gaussian mixture models, which encode the large variations of stroke relationships statistically.
In the proposed HCCR system, we use the single-site likelihood clique potentials to extract many candidate strokes from character images, and use the pairsite clique potentials to determine the best structural match between the input candidate strokes and the MRF-based character models by relaxation labeling.
Total left ventricular stroke volume (TSV), antegrade stroke volume (ASV), and mitral regurgitation volume (MRV) and fraction (MRF) were determined and compared between the two modalities.
The reliability of non-invasive quantification of mitral regurgitation (MR) was assessed in 76 patients with angiographically demonstrated MR by comparing the results of different echo-Doppler (ED) indices with angiographic grade and MR fraction (MRF).
Allergic asthma from mint is less well-recognized.
A case of a 54-year-old woman with dyspnea on exposure to the scent of peppermint is presented in whom mint exposure, as seemingly innocuous as the breath of others who had consumed Tic Tac candies, exacerbated her underlying asthma.
Additionally, this cases suggests that asthma can result from inhaling the scent of mint and gives consideration to obtaining confirmatory pre- and postexposure pulmonary function data by both impulse oscillometry and spirometry.
We review the significance of elevated alpha-fetoprotein levels and discuss the clinical relevance of this unusual presentation of a possible primary Hodgkin's lymphoma.
However, we have found that exogenous 8-OHdG can paradoxically reduce ROS production, attenuate the nuclear factor-KB signaling pathway, and ameliorate the expression of proinflammatory mediators such as interleukin (IL)-1, IL-6, cyclo-oxygenase-2, and inducible nitric oxide synthase in addition to expression of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate oxidase (NOX)-1, NOX organizer-1 and NOX activator-1 in various conditions of inflammation-based gastrointestinal (GI) diseases including gastritis, inflammatory bowel disease, pancreatitis, and even colitis-associated carcinogenesis.
We studied nine patients (56 +/- 7 years) with complete AV-block and permanent dual-chamber pacemaker (DDD) under different pacing modes: ventricle pacing (VVI) 70 bpm, DDD 106 +/- 4 bpm, rate adaptive pacing (VVI-FA) 108 +/- 3 bpm.
Recently, several reports have demonstrated that dysregulation of miR-4262 is in numerous cancers.
Overexpression of miR-4262 was demonstrated to decrease GALNT4 mRNA and protein expression levels, and thereby suppressed cell viability, growth and cell-cycle progression in SW480 and SW620 colon cancer cells.
The expression level of miR-4262 was observed to be downregulated as the expression of GALNT4 was upregulated in colon cancer tissues and cell lines.
In conclusion, the results demonstrated that miR-4262 may be involved in the development of colon cancer via targeting of GALNT4.
The miR-4262/GALNT4 axis may be a novel target for diagnosing and understanding the underlying molecular mechanism of colon cancer.
The aim of this study was to investigate whether miR-4262 was associated with the prognosis of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients.
In this study, we investigated the role and underlying mechanism of miR-4262 in the proliferation of human cutaneous malignant melanoma (CMM) cells.
The expression levels of miR-4262 were significantly upregulated in cancerous tissues compared with those in matched adjacent normal tissues from 110 CMM patients.
miR-4262 was also regulated in five types of CMM cell lines, displaying an opposite expression pattern to that of Kruppel-like 6 (KLF6), a proven tumor suppressor in several cancers other than CMM.
miR-4262 is a potential tumor promoter in human cancers.
In this study, we first investigated the role of miR-4262 in the proliferation and invasion of human breast cancer cells.
Our results showed that, compared with the adjacent tissues and MCF-10A normal breast epithelial cells, miR-4262 was markedly increased in the breast cancer tissues and five cell lines, including MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-468, MDA-MB-435, SKBR3, and MCF-7.
Then the miR-4262 mimic or oligo anta-miR-4262 was transfected into MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 breast cancer cell lines.
In conclusion, miR-4262 positively regulates proliferation and invasion of human breast cancer cells via suppression of KLF6 and KLF15.
Together, our data suggest that suppression of miR-4262 in OS cells may promote OPN-mediated cancer invasion, highlighting miR-4262 as an intriguing therapeutic target to prevent OS metastases.
Those can be classified into four groups: hypercalciuric hypomagnesemias (encompassing mutations in CLDN16, CLDN19, CASR, CLCNKB), Gitelman-like hypomagnesemias (CLCNKB, SLC12A3, BSND, KCNJ10, FYXD2, HNF1B, PCBD1), mitochondrial hypomagnesemias (SARS2, MT-TI, Kearns-Sayre syndrome) and other hypomagnesemias (TRPM6, CNMM2, EGF, EGFR, KCNA1, FAM111A).
For radiculopathy, epidural corticosteroids were associated with greater immediate-term reduction in pain (weighted mean difference on a scale of 0 to 100, -7.55 [95% CI, -11.4 to -3.74]; SOE, moderate), function (standardized mean difference after exclusion of an outlier trial, -0.33 [CI, -0.56 to -0.09]; SOE, low), and short-term surgery risk (relative risk, 0.62 [CI, 0.41 to 0.92]; SOE, low).
The final multilevel growth model revealed improvements in RMDQ scores in patients with radiculopathy at the 6-week (-8.1, 95 % CI -12.6 to -2.6; P = 0.006) and 6-month (-4.1, 95 % CI -7.4 to -0.7; P = 0.020) follow-up occasions compared to patients without radiculopathy.
An interaction between electrodiagnostic status and time revealed faster weekly improvements in RMDQ scores in patients with radiculopathy at the 6-week (-0.72, 95 % CI -1.4 to -0.04; P = 0.040) through the 16-week (-0.30, 95 % CI, -0.57 to -0.04; P = 0.028) follow-up occasions compared to patients without radiculopathy.
For patients with radiculopathy, a repeated-measures analysis of variance showed a significant decrease in the H reflex amplitude (from 0.81 +/- 0.4 to 0.69 +/- 0.39 mV), an increase in radicular symptoms after reading (from 4.2 +/- 1.3 to 5.6 +/- 1.4 on the visual analog scale), an increase in the H reflex amplitude (from 0.69 +/- 0.39 to 1.01 +/- 0.49 mV), and a decrease in pain intensity (from 5.6 +/- 1.4 to 1.5 +/- 1.3) after repeated neck retractions.
Although some autoinflammatory diseases are due to gain-of-function mutations for caspase-1 activity, common diseases such as gout, type 2 diabetes, heart failure, recurrent pericarditis, rheumatoid arthritis, and smoldering myeloma also are responsive to IL-1Beta neutralization.
Inactivation of Ccl2 in an Lkb1-driven mouse model of endometrial cancer slowed tumor progression and increased survival.
In human primary endometrial cancers, loss of LKB1 protein was strongly associated with increased CCL2 expression by tumor cells as well as increased macrophage density in the tumor microenvironment.
These data demonstrate that CCL2 is a potent effector of LKB1 loss in endometrial cancer, creating potential avenues for therapeutic opportunities.
Our results showed that in HEC-1-B (human endometrial cancer) cells, IL-17 stimulation induced mRNA level increases of CCL2, CCL5, CCL20, CXCL2, and IL-8.
In this study of Turkish women, the association of CCL2 A2518G and CCR2 V64I polymorphisms with endometrial cancer was investigated using 50 endometrial cancer patients and 211 controls.
In our study, individuals with CCL2 A2518G GG genotype showed a 6.7-fold increased risk for endometrial cancer (p&lt;0.0001) and individuals with CCL2 A2518G A allele had a 7.14-fold lower risk of endometrium cancer (p&lt;0.0001).
In conclusion, we state that there appears to be an association between polymorphism of CCL2 and its receptor CCR2 and endometrial cancer.
A total of 146 cryptorchid and 140 infertile patients without a history of cryptorchidism were screened with a sequence tagged site plus/minus method and further confirmed and characterized by CDY1/DAZ gene dosage and copy analysis.
Downregulation of microRNA-497 (miR-497) has been observed in human colorectal cancer (CRC) tissues, but the function of miR-497 in CRC has not been well investigated.
The aim of this study is to explore the various modes of action miR-497 has on human cervical cancer (CC) cell behavior.
In this study, the expression levels of PVT1 and miR-497 in NSCLC cells were determined by qRT-PCR.
Our findings indicated that PVT1 was significantly upregulated and miR-497 was markedly downregulated in NSCLC cell lines.
Moreover, PVT1 overexpression reversed the inhibitory effect of miR-497 on cell viability, invasion and promotion effect on apoptosis of NSCLC cells.
In conclusion, knockdown of PVT1 inhibited cell viability, invasion and induced apoptosis in NSCLC by regulating miR-497 expression, elucidating the molecular mechanism of the oncogenic role of PVT1 in NSCLC and providing an lncRNA-directed target for NSCLC.
Many prominent cancer-associated molecules have been identified over the recent years which include EGFR, CD44, TGFbRII, HER2, miR-497, NMP22, BTA, Fibrin/FDP etc.
PHR patient portal users (34 percent of eligible persons) were older and more likely to be White, have private health insurance, and develop gestational diabetes than nonusers.
We searched the Internet to review patient-held medical records (PHRs) of patients with diabetes and examine current levels of integration of diabetes and depression care in Japan.
Eight sets of PHRs were found for people with diabetes.
All PHRs included clinical follow-up of diabetes and multidisciplinary clinical pathways for diabetes care.
In terms of an integrated PHR for a patient comorbid with diabetes and depression, necessary components include hopes/preferences, educational information on diabetes complications and treatment, medical history, stress and coping, resources, and monitoring diabetes and depression.
A new PHR may be suitable for comorbid patients with diabetes and depression.
to evaluate the attitude of patients with Type II diabetes towards using a PHR to manage their condition.
The attitude of patients towards using PHR in management of their diabetes was positive.
Personal health records (PHRs) have the potential to improve patient self-management for chronic conditions such as diabetes.
The purpose of this qualitative study was to explore how patients with type 2 diabetes used a PHR to manage their diabetes-related health information for self-care.
Fifty-nine patients with type 2 diabetes were interviewed 3-6 months after receiving initial training on a free-of-charge, Web-based PHR.
The objective of this paper is to describe the design and implementation of a Personal Health Record System (PHR-S) for supporting monitoring of blood glucose in diabetes mellitus type 2 patients.
In this study the different applications and functionalities of the program are demonstrated such as: exhaustive assembly (rDNA region and mitochondrial genome), extracting homologous regions or genes (IGS, RPB1, RPB2 and TEF1a), as well as extracting multiple regions within a single run.
Sequences of the translation elongation factor 1Alfa (tef1Alfa), RNA polymerase II subunit B2 (rpb2), ATP citrate lyase subunit A (acla), and internal transcribed spacer (ITS) regions were monomorphic, while the intergenic spacer (IGS) region showed length polymorphisms at two minisatellites of 23 and 39 nucleotides (nt).
The phylogenetic relationships of these species were determined using sequences from the ITS and IGS region of the nuclear rRNA gene complex, two nuclear genes ( Beta -tubulin (benA) and RNA polymerase II second largest subunit (rpb2)) and two mitochondrial genes (small rRNA subunit (rns) and cytochrome oxidase subunit I (cox1)) and, where available, related sequences from databases.
The combined use of the three commonly employed nuclear genes (benA, rpb2, and ITS), the IGS region, and two less often used mitochondrial gene sequences (rns and cox1) as a single unit resolved several taxonomic ambiguities.
In order to find other markers that, in combination with the ITS rDNA region can be used for species identification in Cladonia, we studied the loci IGS rDNA, ef1Alfa, rpb2 and cox1.
Three-gene combined analyses (ITS+IGS+rpb2) were performed and the results indicated that the Chinese 'G.
Seven loci were analyzed: the translation elongation factor 1 alpha gene (EF-1Alfa); the nuclear rRNA internal transcribed spacer (ITS), large subunit (LSU), and intergenic spacer (IGS) regions; the second largest subunit of the RNA polymerase gene (RPB2); the calmodulin gene (CAM); and the mitochondrial small subunit (mtSSU) rRNA gene.
Twenty-nine IGS, 27 EF-1Alfa, 26 RPB2, 24 CAM, 18 ITS, 19 LSU, and 18 mtSSU haplotypes were identified; 29 were unique, and haplotypes for 24 clinical strains were novel.
Complete absence of STAT6 was most common in pleomorphic liposarcoma and alveolar soft part sarcoma (60% and 72% cases negative, respectively).
Patients with ASC due to choledocholithiasis were allocated to two groups: Those who underwent EST immediately and those who underwent EBD followed by EST 1 wk later because they were under anticoagulant therapy, had a coagulopathy (international normalized ratio &gt; 1.3, partial thromboplastin time greater than twice that of control), or had a platelet count &lt; 50000 x 10(3)/myL.
A cross of the Asd-4 mutant with wild-type resulted in fruiting bodies that appeared to be normal macroscopically but which were complete devoid of asci and ascospores.
A mutant strain (asd-1) with a recessive crossing defect (apparently caused by the RIP process) was isolated; in this strain, early development is normal and may asci are formed, but ascospores are never delineated.
cPGES and mPGES-2 have been found expressed in normal gastric mucosa, with no change in expression levels seen in gastritis or gastric ulcer tissue.
Herein we investigated the ATR-Chk1 and ATM-Chk2 signalings in male breast cancer (MBC).
We have previously shown that the1100delC variant of the cell-cycle-checkpoint kinase gene CHEK2, which is carried by approximately 1% of the population confers a two-fold increase in female breast cancer and a 10-fold increase in male breast cancer.
The purpose of present study was to investigate the relation of serum interleukin-19 (IL-19) levels with diabetic nephropathy (DN).
IL-19 is significantly positive correlated with UAE and Cystatin C. IL-19 may play an important role that contributes to the progression of diabetic nephropathy.
We also demonstrate a large increase in levels of IL-19 in urine of patients with chronic kidney disease, which significantly correlated with estimated glomerular filtration rate levels.
Non-clustered protocadherins (PCDHs) are calcium-dependent adhesion molecules which have attracted attention for their possible roles in the neuronal circuit formation during development and their implications in the neurological disorders such as autism and mental retardation.
Mutation screening of 30 individuals with autism identified two PCDH11Y polymorphic amino acid changes, F885V and K980N.
In the present study, we analyzed the expression levels of LETM1 in bladder cancer tissues and non-cancerous tissues as well as in four bladder cancer cell lines (T24, EJ, 5637 and J82) and a human bladder epithelial immortalized cell line SV-HUC-1.
The PD-L1 mRNA and protein expression levels were measured in the bladder cancer T24 cell line and the human uroepithelial SV-HUC-1 cell line, following treatment with interleukin (IL)-2, interferon (IFN)-Alfa and IFN-Gamma, by reverse transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) and western blot analysis, respectively.
RT-qPCR and western blotting demonstrated that cytokines IL-2, IFN-Alfa and IFN-Gamma markedly upregulated PD-L1 mRNA expression rates and protein levels in bladder cancer T24 cells (P&lt;0.05), but had no significant effect in non-tumor SV-HUC-1 cells.
Our data showed that miR-6838 was sharply up-regulated in the bladder tissues from bladder cancer patients and 4 human bladder cancer cell lines, compared with the healthy volunteers and SU-HUC-1 human normal bladder epithelial cells.
Treatment with dioscin decreased viability of BC 5637 and T24 cells, but not non-cancer bladder epithelial cell, SV-HUC-1.
A primary deficiency of protein C or S is proposed which would produce cerebral thrombosis with exposure of phospholipids; this thrombosis then, like antigens, would generate antibodies acting on the thrombin-thrombomodulin complex, exacerbating the thrombotic process.
To investigate whether defects in the SPATA17 gene are associated with azoospermia due to meiotic arrest, a mutational analysis was conducted, in which the SPATA17 coding regions of 18 Japanese patients with this condition were sequenced.
The frequencies of erythrocyte MNSs antigens and certain histocompatibility leukocyte antigen (HLA) specificities (HLA-A, HLA-B, and HLA-DR) were determined in white patients with meningitis or epiglottitis due to Haemophilus influenzae type b and in controls.
Analysis of antigen expression pattern, the presence or absence of T cell-associated antigen deletion, and the expression of CD10 and CD34 by 4-color flow cytometry can help differentiate thymoma from T-cell ALL/LBL.
We found that CYC1 was upregulated in breast tumor tissues, especially in tissues with lymph node metastasis.
And higher expression of CYC1 correlates with poor prognosis in breast cancer patients using online databases and tools.
Then we confirmed that CYC1 contributed to metastasis and proliferation in two highly metastatic human breast cancer cell lines.
Our results indicated that CYC1 plays crucial roles in breast cancer progression and might be a predictive factor assisting future patient diagnosis.
Ubiquinol-cytochrome c reductase hinge protein (UQCRH), as a connecter between cytochrome c1 with cytochrome c in complex III of respiratory chain, is top-ranked hypermethylated gene in clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC).
This study aimed at testing a panel of nine reference genes [beta-2-microglobulin, cytochrome c-1 (CYC1), glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH), hydroxymethylbilane synthase, hypoxanthine guanine phosphoribosyl transferase 1, ribosomal protein L13a (RPL13A), succinate dehydrogenase, TATA-box binding protein and 14-3-3 protein zeta] to identify and validate the most suitable reference genes for expression studies in human glioma of different grades (World Health Organization grades II-IV).
After analysis of the stability values calculated using geNorm, NormFinder, and BestKeeper algorithms, GAPDH, RPL13A, and CYC1 can be indicated as reference genes applicable for accurate normalization of gene expression in glioma compared with normal brain and anaplastic astrocytoma or glioblastoma alone within this experimental setting.
Kaplan-Meier plots identified correlations between individual or combined overexpression of E2F1, E2F3a, Mps1/TTK, Nek2, BubR1, or Hec1 and poor overall and relapse-free survival of breast cancer patients.
By interrogating the METABRIC database, we observed a significant correlation between p53 expression and that of c-Abl and TTK in basal-like breast cancers.
The protein kinase threonine tyrosine kinase (TTK; also known as Mps1) is a critical component of the spindle assembly checkpoint and a promising drug target for the treatment of aggressive cancers, such as triple negative breast cancer.
High levels of the mitotic checkpoint kinase Mps1/TTK have correlated with high histologic grade in breast cancer, suggesting a potential new therapeutic target for aggressive breast cancers (BC).
These compounds were evaluated in anti-proliferative assays of a panel of 15 breast cancer cell lines and further examined for their ability to inhibit a variety of Mps1-dependent biological functions.
In addition, the lead compounds 1 and 13 inhibit Mps1 kinase enzymatic activity with IC50 values from 0.356myM to 0.809myM, and inhibited Mps1-associated cellular functions such as centrosome duplication and the spindle checkpoint in triple negative breast cancer cells.
Using drug discovery technologies, computational modeling, medicinal chemistry, cell culture and in vivo assays, novel small molecule Mps1/TTK inhibitors have been identified as potential targeted therapies for breast cancers.
However, high levels of Mps1 are found in many types of human malignancies, including glioblastoma, thyroid carcinoma, breast cancer, and other cancers.
Here, we employed amphiphilic polymers and silenced the expression of two cell cycle proteins, TTK and CDC20, and the anti-apoptosis protein survivin to determine the efficacy of polymer-mediated siRNA treatment in breast cancer cells as well as side effects in nonmalignant cells in vitro.
To explore expressions of matrix metalloproteinase-1 (MMP-1), tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases-1 (TIMP-1) and transforming growth factor-Beta1 (TGF-Beta1) in valve tissue of rheumatic heart disease (RHD), and to analyzed their roles in RHD.
Objectives The aim of this study was to investigate plasma ADAMTS-13 activity in patients with proliferative lupus nephritis and to evaluate the role of clinical, laboratory and pathological features, especially the vascular lesions in lupus nephritis.
Results Plasma ADAMTS-13 activity in lupus nephritis patients was significantly lower than that in normal controls (84 +/- 21% vs. 90 +/- 13%, p = 0.005).
Conclusions Decreased ADAMTS-13 activity was found in patients with proliferative lupus nephritis, and plasma ADAMTS-13 activity was closely associated with renal injury indices, especially pathological vascular scores.
The serum ADAMTS-13 activity was significantly lower in patients with both lupus nephritis and TTP-HUS than in patients with lupus nephritis only and in normal control (40% versus 69%, P = 0.012; 40% versus 81%, P &lt; 0.001, respectively).
The prevalence of ADAMTS-13 autoantibodies was significantly higher in patients with both lupus nephritis and TTP-HUS than in patients with lupus nephritis only and in normal control (6/7, 86% versus 10/55, 18%, P &lt; 0.001; 6/7, 86% versus 0, P &lt; 0.001, respectively).
ADAMTS-13 autoantibodies might play an important role in the pathogenesis of TTP-HUS associated with lupus nephritis.
Plasma vWF and vWF-CP activities were measured using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and residual collagen binding assay respectively in patients with lupus nephritis (n = 31), primary nephritic syndrome (n = 25), diabetic nephropathy (n = 45), chronic glomerulonephritis (n = 38) and 40 normal controls.
Renal biopsy demonstrated that the vWF level in stage IV was higher than in stages II and III while vWF-CP activity was lower in patients with lupus nephritis.
Furthermore the demonstration of a normal vWF-CP assay aided in the distinction between TTP and MAHA due to lupus nephritis.
In this study we have investigated the distribution and the level of expression of kinesin light chains (KLCs) (responsible for binding of cargos during anterograde transport) and of dynein intermediate chain (DIC) (a component of the dynein complex during retrograde transport) in frontal cortex and cerebellar cortex of control subjects and Alzheimer's disease patients.
By immunoblotting, we found a significant decrease in the levels of expression of KLC1 and 2 and DIC in the frontal cortex, but not in the cerebellar cortex, of Alzheimer's disease patients.
We suggest that reduction of KLCs and DIC proteins in AD cortex results from both reduced expression and neuronal loss, and that these reductions and GSK-3Beta-mediated phosphorylation of KLC1 contribute to disturbances of axoplasmic flows and synaptic integrity in Alzheimer's disease.
Children with cystic fibrosis (CF) often have suboptimal adherence rates to nebulized medication.
A cocktail of three phages active against Pseudomonas aeruginosa isolates from cystic fibrosis patients was developed for a potential nebulized formulation.
Treatment regimen for families of children with cystic fibrosis (CF) is considerable, particularly when nebulised therapies for chronic Pseudomonas aeruginosa airway infection are prescribed.
The time requirements for multiple daily nebulizer treatments are important impediments to the quality of life for most patients with cystic fibrosis (CF).
Therefore, in this study, the author describes for the first time the common feature of oral clefts in patients carrying a microduplication of 15q13.3 encompassing the CHRNA7 gene, which sheds light on the correlation between CHRNA7 and cleft palate.
In contrast to GTG banding, array CGH determined the exact number of deleted genes and thus allowed the identification of candidate genes for cleft palate (GREM1, CX36, MEIS2), congenital heart defect (ACTC, GREM1, CX36, MEIS2), and mental retardation (ARHGAP11A, CHRNA7, CHRM5).
Comparative deletion mapping shows that this region can be dissected into five chromosomal segments containing at least six candidate genes (DAB1, HOOK1, NFIA, DOCK7, DNAJC6, and PDE4B) most likely responsible for syndromic intellectual disability, which was corroborated by their reduced transcript levels in RT-qPCR.
Importantly, one patient with an intragenic microdeletion within NFIA and an additional patient with a balanced translocation disrupting NFIA display intellectual disability coupled with macrocephaly.
We propose NFIA is responsible for intellectual disability coupled with macrocephaly, and microdeletions at 1p31.3p32.2 constitute a contiguous gene syndrome with several genes contributing to syndromic intellectual disability.
Non-progressive cerebellar ataxia with mental retardation (CANPMR, OMIM 614756) and chromosome 1p32-p31 deletion syndrome (OMIM 613735) are two very rare inherited disorders, which are caused by mono-allelic deficiency (haplo-insufficiency) of calmodulin-binding transcription activator 1 (CAMTA1) and, respectively, nuclear factor 1 A (NFIA) genes.
Among these 24 genes, four transcription factors Auts2, Nfia, Nr4a2, and Sox5 were found, suggesting that TBR1 controls a transcriptional cascade relevant to autism pathogenesis.
Some of these maternal and maternal-child associations were in or adjacent to autism candidate genes including: PCDH9, FOXP1, GABRB3, NRXN1, RELN, MACROD2, FHIT, RORA, CNTN4, CNTNAP2, FAM135B, LAMA1, NFIA, NLGN4X, RAPGEF4, and SDK1.
These results provided a mechanistic linking between TRPM2-mediated Ca2+ influx and p47 phox signaling to induce excess ROS production and TXNIP-mediated NLRP3 inflammasome activation under HG, and suggested that TRPM2 represented a potential target for alleviating NLRP3 inflammasome activation related to hyperglycemia-induced oxidative stress in Type 2 diabetes Mellitus (T2DM).
SOX3 mutations have been associated with growth hormone deficiency, variable degrees of additional pituitary hormone deficiencies, and mental retardation.
SOX3 involvement should be considered in a male with short stature due to GH deficiency associated with intellectual disability.
A further XX male, ascertained because of intellectual disability, carried a de novo cryptic duplication at Xq27.1, involving SOX3.
In humans, over- and underdosage of SOX3 is associated with X-linked hypopituitarism with variable phenotypes ranging from isolated GH deficiency (GHD) to panhypopituitarism, with or without mental retardation and, in most cases, with reported pituitary imaging, an ectopic/undescended posterior pituitary.
Screening for SOX3 should be advised not only for hypopituitary patients with an ectopic posterior pituitary, but also for those with a structurally normal pituitary and additional findings, including clefts and a persistent craniopharyngeal canal, with or without mental retardation.
Both duplications encompassing SOX3 and loss-of function mutations in SOX3 have been reported in a minor portion of X-linked isolated growth hormone deficiency (GHD) or combined pituitary hormone deficiency (CPHD) patients with or without mental retardation.
In humans, duplication of SOX3 and polyalanine expansions at its C-terminus may cause intellectual disability and hypopituitarism.
The UNH159 marker as well as RNA-binding motif protein, X-linked (rbmx), SRY-box containing gene 3 (sox3) and alpha-thalassemia/mental retardation syndrome X-linked (atrx) genes were mapped to linkage group 2.
Both overdosage of SOX3, as a result of gene duplication, and loss of function resulting from expansion of the first polyalanine (PA) tract are associated with variable degrees of hypopituitarism, with or without mental retardation.
Duplications and polyalanine expansions within the transcription factor SOX3 have recently been described in association with infundibular hypoplasia, hypopituitarism and variable mental retardation, whilst mutations in SOX2 are associated with variable hypopituitarism in association with learning difficulties, oesophageal atresia and anophthalmia.
Using mouse P19 embryonal carcinoma cells, which divide rapidly, yet in retinoic acid adopt a neuronal phenotype, admixed with occasional (approximately 10%) fibroblast-like cells, together with a panel of peptide-specific antibodies raised to 7 of the 8 CCT subunits we show that; (1) adoption of a post mitotic phenotype is accompanied by reduced CCT protein expression, significantly more so for CCTbeta, CCTdelta, CCTepsilon, and CCTtheta than for CCTalpha (TCP-1), CCTgamma and CCTzeta; (2) CCTalpha is detected preferentially over other subunits in neurites of P19 neurons; (3) small amounts of CCTalpha and gamma are localised in nuclei (i.e.
In line with these observations, in preclinical models, SIRT2 deficiency increases survival of mice with chronic staphylococcal infection, while having no effect on the course of toxic shock syndrome toxin-1, LPS or TNF-induced shock, fulminant Escherichia coli peritonitis, sub-lethal Klebsiella pneumoniae pneumonia, and chronic candidiasis.
Lung injury was studied by measuring: vascular permeability-related pulmonary edema; histopathologic scores, neutrophil infiltration and concentrations of inflammatory cytokines in bronchoalveolar fluid; expression of inflammatory enzymes and sirtuin (SIRT) 1 as well as nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-KB) activity in pulmonary tissues.
The aim of our study was to compare the expression of sirtuin in large and small airways in nonsmokers, asymptomatic smokers, and smokers with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Smokers both with and without chronic obstructive pulmonary disease had decreased sirtuin expression in large airways.
However, in small airways, sirtuin expression was decreased only in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Smoking is characterized by suppressed sirtuin expression in large airways, whereas chronic obstructive pulmonary disease is characterized by more severe suppression of sirtuin expression both in large and small airways.
These data demonstrate a new mechanism of CB plasticity and suggest P2X-TRPV1 dependent sensory LTF as a novel target for pharmacological intervention in some forms of neurogenic hypertension associated with recurrent apneas.
Human equilibrative nucleoside transporters (hENT) 1 and 2, encoded by SLC29A1 and SLC29A2, permit the bidirectional passage of nucleoside analogues into cells and may correlate with clinical responses to chemotherapy in patients with colorectal cancer (CRC).
The purpose of this study was to evaluate the expression profiles of SLC29A1 and SLC29A2 in human cancer cell lines.
Using quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction, we comprehensively profiled the transcription levels of SLC29A1 and SLC29A2 in 16 colon cancer cell lines.
We validated the ubiquitous and heterogeneous distribution of SLC29A1 and SLC29A2 in human colon cancer cell lines and demonstrated that SLC29A1 was highly expressed in 25% of metastatic cell lines (Colo201 and Colo205) and 62.5% of primary cell lines (Caco2, Colo320, HCT116, RKO, and SW48).
For the first time, we showed that both SLC29A1 and SLC29A2 were expressed at lower levels in colon cancer cell lines originating from metastatic sites than from primary sites.
As ENT inhibitors including dilazep have shown efficacy improving oHSV1 targeted oncolytic cancer therapy, a series of dilazep analogues was synthesized and biologically evaluated to examine both ENT1 and ENT2 inhibition.
The most significant changes common to HLHS-RV versus control-RV and control-LV sample groups is observed for Anti mullerian hormone receptor 2 (AMHR2) (+18.79 control-RV, +3.38 control-LV), and the BMP antagonist Inhibin alpha (INHA) (+11.47 control-RV, +5.73 control-LV).
We have described previously the Ets family member ERM/ETV5 specifically upregulated in endometrial endometrioid carcinoma (EEC) associated with myometrial infiltration.
We have described recently the Ets family transcription factor, ERM/ETV5, specifically up-regulated in endometrioid endometrial carcinoma (EEC) and associated with myometrial infiltration.
Finally, the specific localization of ERM/ETV5 and MMP-2 at the invasive front of myometrial infiltrating human endometrial carcinomas further reinforced the hypothesis of a role for ERM/ETV5 in the early steps of endometrial dissemination.
Most importantly, the defects seen in Gfi1 deficient mice also point to roles of Gfi1 in diseases of the immune system that involve auto-immune responses and acute lymphoid leukemia and lymphoma.
The results showed that the gfi-1 expression level in all leukemia patients was significantly higher than that in normal group (p &lt; 0.05); the gfi-1 mRNA expression in chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) and acute myeloid leukemia (AML) or acute lymphoid leukemia (ALL) patients was significantly higher than that in normal group (p &lt; 0.05); but the difference of gfi-1 mRNA expression between AL and CML or ALL and AML was not significant.
The MDM2 309GG genotype was linked to a higher risk of acute G3-4 dermatitis.
In an antibody microarray chip analysis, MDM2 expression was increased in atopic dermatitis patients.
All doxorubicin (Dox)-resistant tumors expressed higher levels of cancer stem-like cell biomarkers, including CD44, Wnt and its receptor LRP5/6, relative to Dox-sensitive tumors.
Our results showed that simultaneous binding to LRP5/6 and uPAR by the dual receptor targeted IONPs was required to inhibit breast cancer cell invasion.
STAT5 LKO caused hyperglycemia, hyperinsulinemia, hyperleptinemia and elevated free fatty acid and cholesterol concentrations under HFD feeding but induced only hyperglycemia on normal diet.
Prx2 is a key cytoprotector against IO that is induced either by iron supplementation or due to chronic hemolysis as in Beta-thalassemia.
Peroxiredoxin-2 (Prx2), a typical 2-cysteine peroxiredoxin, is upregulated during Beta-thalassemic erythropoiesis, but its contribution to stress erythropoiesis, a common feature of thalassemia, is yet to be fully defined.
In the present study, we aimed to investigate plasma levels of peroxiredoxin 2 (Prx2) and thioredoxin 1 (Trx1), and the activity of thioredoxin reductase (TrxR), in thalassemia major (TM) patients living in the Antalya region, Turkey.
Proteomic analysis of microparticles released from thalassemia intermedia erythrocytes indicated that, besides hemichromes and clustered band 3, the microparticles contain a characteristic set of proteins that includes catalase, heat shock protein 70, peroxiredoxin 2 and carbonic anhydrase.
Interestingly, Prx II interacted with Hb in mouse RBCs, and their interaction, in particular, was severely impaired in RBCs of patients with thalassemia (THAL) and sickle cell anemia (SCA).
The cover image, by Lihadh Al Gazali et al., is based on the Original Article A recessive syndrome of intellectual disability, moderate overgrowth, and renal dysplasia predisposing to Wilms tumor is caused by a mutation in FIBP gene, DOI:10.1002/ajmg.a.37741.
Different observational clinical studies reported that circulating levels of ANGPTL2 increase significantly in various chronic inflammatory diseases and showed associations between ANGPTL2 levels and diagnosis and/or prognosis of cardiovascular diseases, diabetes, chronic kidney disease, and various types of cancers.
Circulating ANGPTL2 is increased in chronic kidney disease (CKD), where the risk of CVD is amplified.
The positive association between post-KTx ANGPTL2, aortic stiffness and mortality, suggests that ANGPTL2 may play a biological role in CKD-related CVD.
Histological analysis of human kidneys indicated abundant expression of angiopoietin-like protein 2 (ANGPTL2) in renal tubule epithelial cells during progression of renal fibrosis.
Furthermore, ANGPTL2 deficiency in a mouse unilateral ureteral obstruction model significantly reduced renal fibrosis by decreasing TGF-Beta1 signal amplification in kidney.
Thus, ANGPTL2 and TGF-Beta1 positively regulate each other as renal fibrosis progresses.
demonstrated that genetic depletion of Angptl2 confers amelioration of the mouse kidney fibrosis induced by a unilateral ureteral obstruction, implicating that ANGPTL2, predominantly in the renal tubular compartments, activates the transforming growth factor-Beta signaling and vice versa through miR-221.
In the present study, we tested whether there is a correlation between increased ANGPTL2 expression and inflammation in response to Staphylococcus aureus in murine mastitis and the mechanisms involved.
The present findings indicate ANGPTL2 may mediate the inflammation in murine mastitis through the activation of IL-6 and TNF-Alfa.
The aim of this study was to investigate the relationship between serum Angptl2 level and chronic kidney disease (CKD).
The age- and sex-adjusted ORs for the presence of CKD increased with higher serum Angptl2 level.
Elevated serum Angptl2 is associated with the likelihood of CKD in the general population.
We investigated whether serum Angptl2 levels are associated with diabetic nephropathy in patients with type 2 diabetes.
This suggests a possible role of Angptl2 in progressive nephropathy in patients with type 2 diabetes.
Improvements to restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP)-based genotyping assays currently used for detection of mutations responsible for bovine ferrochelatase and myophosphorylase deficiencies, and equine hyperkalemic periodic paralysis (HYPP) are described.
Thus, peripheral changes of TOAG-1 and RHAMM expression can be used to predict clinical response to Alefacept treatment in psoriasis patients.
In this study, we examined the pharmacological profile of KCL-440, a new PARP inhibitor, and its neuroprotective effects in the rat acute cerebral infarction model induced by photothrombotic middle cerebral artery (MCA) occlusion.
Our data thus suggest that the tested PARP polymorphisms do not principally contribute to cerebral infarction, although extensive searches would be required to clarify whether the PARP gene plays an important role in the pathogenesis of human stroke.
The OR of breast cancer for the percentage BPE measure (BPE%) quantified from SUB1 was 3.5 (95% Confidence Interval: 1.3, 9.8; p = 0.015) for 20% increments.
In this study, we show elevated expression of SUB1 in aggressive prostate cancer.
Knockdown of SUB1 in prostate cancer cells resulted in reduced cell proliferation, invasion and migration in vitro, and tumor growth and metastasis in vivo.
PLK1 knockdown or use of PLK1 inhibitor can mitigate oncogenic function of SUB1 in benign prostate cancer cells.
Thus, our study suggests that miR-101 loss results in increased SUB1 expression and subsequent activation of known oncogenes driving prostate cancer progression and metastasis.
This study therefore demonstrates functional role of SUB1 in prostate cancer, and identifies its regulation and potential downstream therapeutic targets of SUB1 in prostate cancer.
The proposed study aims to explore whether PC4 correlates with VEGF-C/VEGF-D/VEGFR-3 axis of lymphangiogenesis in the lymph node metastasis during lung adenocarcinoma.
Here, small interfering RNA technique was employed to investigate the relationship of PC4 and the VEGF-C/VEGF-D/VEGFR-3 axis in lung adenocarcinoma cell lines as well as tumor xenografts of mice model.
PC4 expression correlated with the levels of VEGF-C, VEGF-D and VEGFR-3 during the development of lymphangiogenesis and lymphatic metastasis in lung adenocarcinoma in vitro and in vivo, which may be a novel marker in the development of lymphangiogenesis and lymphatic metastasis of tumors.
To test the hypothesis that elevated urinary levels of soluble E-cadherin (sE-cadherin) would aid in the detection of transitional cell carcinoma (TCC) of the urinary bladder.
We propose potential pathogenic pathways for transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder in diabetic patients based on altered integrin and cadherin distribution in urothelial cells in diabetic patients.
To evaluate soluble E-cadherin (sE-cadherin) as a potential tumour marker in patients with transitional cell carcinoma (TCC) of the bladder (previously shown to correlate with tumour grade, number of Ta/T1 tumours at presentation and a positive 3-month check cystoscopy) by assessing its serum concentration in relation to transurethral resection of bladder tumour (TURBT).
Elevated mRNA expression of liver IL-6, IL-17A, IL-17F, TGF-Beta1, Alfa-SMA, TGR5, NTCP, OATP1a1, and ileum ASBT and decreased liver IL-10, FXR, CAR, VDR, BSEP, MRP2, MRP3, MRP4 was also observed in ANIT-induced cholestasis but were attenuated or normalized by YCHT.
The objective of the present study is to evaluate whether IL-6, TNF-Alfa, IL-10 are associated with nutritional status in patients with cirrhosis secondary to biliary atresia and compare to healthy controls.
The authors suggest that, in patients with cirrhosis secondary to biliary atresia, IL-6 could be used as a possible supporting biomarker of deficient nutritional status and elevated IL-10 levels could be used as a possible early-stage supporting biomarker of deteriorating nutritional status.
In a prospective study, 47 patients with obstructive jaundice secondary to malignant lesions were evaluated before, at the fifth hour after, and on the fifth day after PTBD for neopterin, nitrate, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-Alfa, interleukin (IL)-6, IL-10, CRP levels, and liver function.
It has been reported that the hypermethylation of APAF-1, DAPK-1 and other tumor suppressive genes (TSGs) correlates with progression of renal cell carcinoma and exerts prognostic and diagnostic relevance in renal cell carcinoma.
The present study confirmed that DAC demethylated the CpGs, particularly APAF-1 in renal carcinoma cells, and that the demethylation synergized the cytotoxity of CDDP in renal carcinoma cells via enhancing the CDDP-induced apoptosis.
The aim of this study was to investigate the occurrence and relevance of promoter methylation of the tumor suppressor DAPK-1, APAF-1 () and SPARC in relation to different pathological stages and histological grades of tumor progression that might act as possible independent prognostic factor in the susceptibility towards renal cell carcinoma (RCC) in North Indian population.
To examine the significance of the methylation level of the p53 target and tumour suppressor genes apoptotic protease activating factor-1 (APAF-1) and death-associated protein kinase-1 (DAPK-1) in 80 microdissected tumour samples from transitional cell carcinoma (TCC) of the bladder and 80 tumour samples from clear-cell renal cell carcinoma (RCC) as well as from non-tumourous bladder and kidney tissue.
Quantification of mRNA expression of HNF1B, six of its potential target genes (PKHD1, PKD1, PKD2, IFT88, TMEM27 and UMOD) and three genes involved in the Mg(2+) renal homeostasis (ATP1A1, FXYD2 and CLDN16) in the urinary sediment of 11 individuals with mutation of HNF1B and in 9 controls (non-invasive assessment of the renal transcriptome).
Collectrin is a downstream target of the transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha), which is mutated in maturity-onset diabetes of the young subtype 3 (MODY3).
Several forms of ichthyosis are associated with neurologic manifestations, including Sjoegren-Larsson syndrome, Refsum disease, and mental retardation-enteropathy-deafness-neuropathy-ichthyosis-keratoderma (MEDNIK) syndrome.
To determine the difference in thrombomodulin expression in the myometrium and in myoma; and to understand the correlation of anticoagulation/fibrinolytic function and the mechanism of uterine artery occlusion in the treatment of leiomyoma.
The relative transcription of thrombomodulin mRNA was 1.28 times higher in myometrial tissue than in myomal tissue (P &lt; 0.05).
Similarly, leiomyoma-associated endometrium expressed less PAI-1 and thrombomodulin in vivo.
Alfa-methylacyl coenzyme A racemase (AMACR) and insulin-like growth factor-II mRNA-binding protein 3 (IMP3) are 2 markers helpful in detecting difficult cases of dysplasia in Barrett esophagus (BE).
To investigate the value of Alfa-methylacyl-CoA racemase (AMACR) immunohistochemistry for predicting neoplastic progression in Barrett's oesophagus (BO).
The aim of this study was to evaluate AMACR expression in the metaplasia-dysplasia-carcinoma sequence in Barrett's esophagus (BE), ulcerative colitis (UC), and Crohn's disease (CD) and to determine whether its expression can be used to detect dysplastic epithelium in these conditions.
These associations implicate genes related to apoptosis (HRK), development (WIF1), oxidative stress (MSR3B), ubiquitination (FBXW8) and neuronal migration (ASTN2), as well as enzymes targeted by new diabetes medications (DPP4), indicating new genetic influences on hippocampal size and possibly the risk of cognitive decline and dementia.
Histomorphometrical analysis of experimental implants inserted in the femurs of CKD mice revealed a trend of decreased BIC ratio at 2-week healing.
A Cochrane Collaboration review (Roderick, Cochrane Data base of systemic reviews 2007, DOI 10.1002/14651858.CD0018.90.pub3) reported that there was no evidence for correction of acidosis by sodium bicarbonate in pre-end-stage renal disease (ESRD) patients, and concluded that randomized controlled trials (RCTs) are necessary to evaluate the benefits and harms of correcting metabolic acidosis in pre-ESRD patients.
We will randomize 600 patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD) stages 3b and 4; 300 of these patients will be included in the bicarbonate study group (Bic), in which levels of bicarbonate should be kept &gt;24 mEq/L; the other 300 patients will be included in the usual-treatment group (no-Bic).
Acid-Base Disorders in CKD: Moderate metabolic acidosis (Bic 16-20) mEq/L is common with glomerular filtration rates below 20 ml/min, and favors bone demineralization due to the release of calcium and phosphate from the bone, chronic hyperventilation, and muscular weakness and atrophy.
In a prospective randomized crossover trial, patients with acute renal failure received CRRT with either sodium bicarbonate (Bic) or sodium lactate (Lac) as a buffering agent over 2 consecutive 24-h periods.
The combination of bicarbonate and mannitol (BIC/MAN) is commonly used to prevent renal failure (RF) in patients with rhabdomyolysis despite the absence of sufficient evidence validating its use.
To unmask weak inputs from outside the conventional RF (CRF), cell excitability was raised by iontophoretic application of glutamate (GLU) and/or bicuculline methiodide (BIC) or by light stimulation of the CRF.
Bicarbonate-buffered replacement fluid (RF-bic) in continuous venovenous hemofiltration (CVVH) may be superior to lactate-buffered replacement fluid (RF-lac) in acute renal failure.
In an open, randomized, multicenter study, we investigated the effects of RF-bic and RF-lac on cardiovascular outcome in patients requiring CVVH following acute renal failure.
The data also suggest that the use of RF-bic during CVVH reduces cardiovascular events in critically ill patients with acute renal failure, particularly those with previous cardiovascular disease or heart failure.
The effect of BIC on whisker-evoked responses was a preferential enhancement in the responses elicited by the whisker giving rise to the highest probability response (center receptive field whisker or CRF).
The primary influence of BIC and, to a lesser degree, 2-OH-S was to prolong the response duration of VPM neurons to CRF whisker stimulation.
Selective PDE5 inhibitors have shown potential in treating kidney fibrosis in patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD), via their downstream signaling, and these inhibitors also have known activity as antithrombotic and anticancer agents.
The FGF9 subfamily, including FGF9, FGF16, and FGF20, in addition to rhFGF16, rhFGF9, and rhFGF20, were shown to stimulate the proliferation and migration of HuH7 human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells.
Furthermore, the results indicate that exogenous rhFGF9- and rhFGF20-activated ERK/NF-KB signal transduction pathways play important roles in the regulation of HCC cell proliferation and migration, and this discovery helps to find the potential for new solutions of the treatment of liver cancer.
These include FGF3 in Michel aplasia; FGF8 in cleft lip/palate and in hypogonadotropic hypogonadism; FGF9 in carcinoma; FGF10 in the lacrimal/salivary glands aplasia, and lacrimo-auriculo-dento-digital syndrome; FGF14 in spinocerebellar ataxia; FGF20 in Parkinson disease; and FGF23 in tumoral calcinosis and hypophosphatemic rickets.
Molecular genetics and developmental studies have identified 21 genes in this region (ADRA1A, ARHGEF10, CHRNA2, CHRNA6, CHRNB3, DKK4, DPYSL2, EGR3, FGF17, FGF20, FGFR1, FZD3, LDL, NAT2, NEF3, NRG1, PCM1, PLAT, PPP3CC, SFRP1 and VMAT1/SLC18A1) that are most likely to contribute to neuropsychiatric disorders (schizophrenia, autism, bipolar disorder and depression), neurodegenerative disorders (Parkinson's and Alzheimer's disease) and cancer.
EphrinB2 (erythropoietin-producing hepatoma interactor B2), a pivotal bidirectional signaling molecule ubiquitously expressed in mammals, is crucial in angiogenesis during development and disease progression.
The aim of the present study was to detect the correlation between the expression of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), angiopoietin 2 (Ang2), ephrinB2 and endocrine gland-derived vascular endothelial growth factor (EG-VEGF) and carcinogenesis or portal vein tumor thrombus (PVTT) formation in human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
We investigated whether the human MBX gene was associated with susceptibility to microphthalmia by analyzing four Korean families demonstrating microphthalmia with congenital cataract.
Therefore, no indications were found for an association between the MBX gene and microphthalmia with congenital cataract in humans.
Sequence changes have been observed for both NCKX1 and NCKX2 in patients with retinal diseases, but a definitive association with retinal disease has not been shown.
To study the possible involvement of the rod (SLC24A1) and cone (SLC24A2) Na-Ca+K exchanger (NCKX) genes in retinal diseases.
Approximately 23% of patients with metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer exhibit somatic or germline aberrations in genes implicated in DNA repair, such as BRCA2, BRCA1, ATM, CHEK2, and PALB2, as well as mismatch repair genes.
Men who inherit pathogenic germline mutations in BRCA2 and BRCA1 are at increased risk of developing aggressive prostate cancer, and those with germline mutations in other DNA repair genes such as ATM, CHEK2, and MSH2/MSH6 may also have increased risks.
The CHEK2 gene del5395 is a founder mutation in the Latvian population, which, however, does not have a direct impact on genetic predisposition toward colorectal, breast, ovarian and prostate cancer.
Human limbal neurospheres expressed the neural lineage markers, Nestin, sex determining region box-2 and N-cadherin, and the retinal transcription factors microphthalmia-associated transcription factor, sex determining region box-2 and orthodentical homeobox-2.
Mutations of orthodentricle homeobox 2 (OTX2) in human and mice often cause retinal dystrophy and nyctalopia, suggesting a role of OTX2 in mature retina, in addition to its functions in the development of the eye and retina.
THE ROLE OF ANGIOTENSIN-CONVERTING ENZYME INHIBITORS: Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACE) affect the different mechanisms that lead to glomerulosclerosis: antihypertensive effect, with the normalisation of blood pressure having demonstrated its determining role in the production of nephrosis in various epidemiological studies; hemodynamic effect with a decrease in glomerular capillary pressure, in the filtration fraction, and inhibition of the bradykinin deterioration; antiproteinuric effect superior to that of other anti-hypertensive drugs (excepting angiotensin II-receptor antagonists).
To investigate whether the reduction in proteinuria is due to decreased generation of angiotensin II (AngII) or to decreased degradation of bradykinin, four series of experiments in established adriamycin nephrosis were performed.
There were few reports demonstrating behavior of kinin and kininogen in the nephrotic syndrome.
In this paper, coagulation factors related to contact activation, such as factor XII (FXII), factor XI (FXI), prekallikrein (PK), high molecular weight kininogen (HMWKG), and kinins were measured in 15 cases of nephrotic syndrome, and clinical significance of these results were discussed.
It was concluded that kinin formation in the nephrotic syndrome was not due to the activation of intrinsic coagulation system but due to release of kinin from low molecular weight kininogen.
To investigate the role of anti-inflammatory TSG-6 in controlling MMP-1 and MMP-3, which have been shown to be upregulated in conjunctivochalasis (CCh).
Direct sequencing analyses were performed in 19 genes, including ALS/frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD)-related genes (SOD2, SOD3, ALS2/alsin, SMN1, PGRN, ANG, VEGF, VCP, VAPB, DCTN1, CHMP2B, and TARDBP or TDP-43), tauopathy-related gene (GSK3beta), and parkinsonism-related genes (alpha-synuclein, LRRK2, parkin, DJ-1, PINK1, and ATP13A2).
This patient broadens the phenotypic spectrum of the 22q11.2 microduplication syndrome and raises the possibility that TUBA8 and USP18 may play an important role in the pathogenesis of amyoplasia.
Despite the support for including patient-reported outcomes (PROs) and health-related quality of life in clinical trials, there have been deficiencies in how these have been assessed and reported in epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) clinical trials.
To redress this, the 5th Ovarian Cancer Consensus Conference, included a plenary session entitled 'How to include PROs in clinical trials'.
To test the hypothesis that ovarian cancer patients with worse PROs would drop out earlier, we examined how patients differed by time of dropout on health-related quality of life (HRQOL), anxiety, depression, optimism and insomnia.
Progression-free survival (PFS), objective response rate (ORR), and patient-reported outcomes (PROs) were significantly improved by adding bevacizumab to chemotherapy for platinum-resistant ovarian cancer (PROC) in the phase III AURELIA trial.
Despite increased recognition of the value of including patient-reported outcomes (PROs) as important end points in phase III clinical trials, there has been a lack of pre-specified PRO hypotheses and shortcomings with the analyses and interpretation of PROs in many ovarian cancer trials.
Promoting the importance of hypothesis-driven PROs in ovarian cancer clinical trials will lead to improvements in the design of these trials and the interpretation of their results.
We conducted the Surgery in Ovarian Cancer Quality of life Evaluation Research study (SOCQER 1), a prospective study investigating the feasibility of collection of serial PROs in patients who had extensive surgery and standard surgery for ovarian cancer.
There is no consensus as to what symptoms or quality-of-life (QOL) domains should be measured as patient-reported outcomes (PROs) in ovarian cancer clinical trials.
The results were included in and combined with an expert consensus-building process to identify the most salient PROs for ovarian cancer clinical trials.
We identified a set of PROs specific to ovarian cancer: abdominal pain, bloating, cramping, fear of recurrence/disease progression, indigestion, sexual dysfunction, vomiting, weight gain, and weight loss.
Findings of the review and consensus process provide good support for use of these ovarian cancer-specific PROs in ovarian cancer clinical trials.
Mutations within this gene are responsible for kinesigenic paroxysmal dyskinesias (PKD) as well as for benign familial infantile epilepsy (BFIE), a disease associating infantile convulsions and choreoathetosis (ICCA), a form of familial hemiplegic migraine (FHM type 4), paroxysmal benign torticollis of childhood, and episodic ataxia.
FHM type 4 is attributed to mutations in the PRRT2 gene, which encodes a proline-rich transmembrane protein of as yet unknown function.
Two PRRT2 mutations were in familial hemiplegic migraine or episodic ataxia, one SLC2A1 family had episodic ataxia and one PNKD family had familial hemiplegic migraine alone.
SLC2A1 mutations were associated with variable phenotypes including paroxysmal kinesigenic dyskinesia, paroxysmal non-kinesigenic dyskinesia, episodic ataxia and myotonia and we identified a novel PNKD gene deletion in familial hemiplegic migraine.
We assessed the clinical features of both FHM families and performed direct sequencing of all coding exons (and adjacent sequences) of the CACNA1A, ATP1A2, PRRT2 and SCN1A genes.
In 2012, PRRT2 has been identified as the fourth FHM gene, and encodes an axonal protein associated to the exocytosis complex.
To characterise the phenotype of a family with paroxysmal exercise induced dystonia (PED) and migraine and establish whether it is linked to the paroxysmal non-kinesigenic dyskinesia (PNKD) locus on chromosome 2q33-35, the familial hemiplegic migraine (FHM) locus on chromosome 19p, or the familial infantile convulsions and paroxysmal choreoathetosis (ICCA syndrome) locus on chromosome 16.
Haplotypes were reconstructed for all the available family members by typing several microsatellite markers spanning the PNKD, FHM, and ICCA loci.
Linkage of the disease to the PNKD, FHM, or ICCA loci was excluded as no common haplotype was shared by all the affected members for each locus.
This family presented with the classic phenotype of PED and is not linked to the PNKD, FHM, or ICCA loci.
The (FZr-EUl/FZl-EUr) and (FZr-EUr)/(FZl-EUl) were used for the patients with unicoronal craniosynostosis.
Our findings indicated that all evaluated parameters (epididymal sperm profile, Johnsen score, Plzf, GfrAlfa-1, Scp-1, Tekt-1 expressions, and histopathological profile) were significantly decreased following testicular torsion (group 3) when compared to the control group (p &lt;= 0.05).
Dyschromatosis symmetrica hereditaria (DSH) is a rare type of pigmentary genodermatosis, which is autosomal dominantly inherited with high penetrance.
The onset of DSH is typically during infancy or childhood.
Additionally, there have been few significant non-cutaneous complications reported with DSH.
The present study reported two sporadic cases of patients born with DSH, confirmed by the identification of ADAR1 mutations.
Additionally, comorbidity of DSH, congenital heart disease (CHD) and hemangioma disease were first reported.
In the patient with isolated DSH from birth, a nonsense mutation (p.Y1192X) was identified, whereas in the second patient with DSH, CHD and hemangioma from birth, a frameshift mutation (p.Glu673ValfsX652) in ADAR1 was identified.
To the best of the authors' knowledge, &gt;120 mutations in ADAR1 have been reported to cause DSH; however, no previous studies have reported mutations in ADAR1 in DSH at birth, with CHD and hemangioma.
The novel variants described in the current study add to the current knowledge of ADAR1 mutations in DSH.
Pathogenic molecular variants in the ADAR gene are a known cause of rare diseases, autosomal recessive Aicardi- Goutieres syndrome type 6, severe infantile encephalopathy with intracranial calcifications and dominant dyschromatosis symmetrica hereditaria, demonstrated mainly in Asian adults.
To identify potential mutation of the ADAR1 gene in a Chinese family and a sporadic case affected with dyschromatosis symmetrica hereditaria(DSH).
The frame-shift mutation c.2638delG (p.Asp880ThrfsX15) and the nonsense mutation c.2867C&gt;A (p.Ser956X) in the ADAR1 gene probably underlie the DSH in our patients.
Dyschromatosis symmetrica hereditaria (DSH) is a rare autosomal dominant cutaneous disorder caused by the mutations of adenosine deaminase acting on RNA1 (ADAR1) gene.
We present a clinical and genetic study of seven unrelated families and two sporadic cases with DSH for mutations in the full coding sequence of ADAR1 gene.
ADAR1 gene was sequenced in seven unrelated families and two sporadic cases with DSH and 120 controls.
We describe six novel mutations of the ADAR1 gene in Chinese patients with DSH including a nonstop mutation p.Stop1227R, which was firstly reported in ADAR1 gene.
A three-generation family exhibiting phenotypic variability with a single germline ADAR1 mutation suggests that chilblain might aggravate the clinical phenotypes of DSH.
All patients underwent upper endoscopy and subsequently liver CT. Three radiologists independently evaluated the presence of high-risk esophageal varices with transverse images alone and with three orthogonal multiplanar reformation (MPR) images, respectively.
To study the correlation between changes in portosystemic collaterals, evaluated by multidetector-row computed tomography imaging using multiplanar reconstruction (MDCT-MPR), and prognosis in patients with hemorrhagic esophageal varices (EV) after endoscopic treatment.
The purpose of our study was to assess the relationship between hemodynamic changes in portosystemic collaterals and the prognosis of patients with esophageal varices after endoscopic injection sclerotherapy using multiplanar reconstruction (MPR) MDCT images.
MPR MDCT images on portosystemic collaterals can accurately predict relapse of esophageal varices after endoscopic injection sclerotherapy.
TTD is caused by mutations in DNA repair/transcription genes XPD, XPB or TTDA, and in TTDN1, a gene of unknown function.
To date, four genes have been identified as responsible for TTD: XPD, XPB, p8/TTDA, and TTDN1.
We analysed the gene expression and protein distribution of different members of the Hsp27, Hsp70, and Hsp90 families in the central nervous system of sheep naturally infected with scrapie.
We have previously shown that scrapie-infected mouse neuroblastoma (ScN2a) cells fail to induce the expression of Hsp72 and Hsp28 after various stress conditions.
In scrapie-infected N2a (ScN2a) cells, Hsp72 and Hsp28 were not induced by heat shock, sodium arsenite, or an amino acid analog, in contrast to uninfected control N2a cells, while other inducible Hsps were increased by these treatments.
We have identified Receptor-interacting serine/threonine protein kinase 4 (RIP4) as a regulator of tumor differentiation in lung adenocarcinoma (AC).
Altogether, our work has identified that loss of RIP4 enhances STAT3 signaling in lung cancer cells, promoting the expression of ECM remodeling genes and cancer dedifferentiation.
In conclusion, our data suggest that RIPK4/EZH2 markers might be used as potential predictors of prognosis in cervical cancer.
To investigate the association between receptor-interacting kinase protein 4 (RIPK4) relative copy number (RCN) and prognosis of stage III( colorectal cancer (CRC) patients treated with oxaliplatin-based chemotherapy.
In colon cancer subgroup, high RIPK4 RCN was significantly associated with poor OS (median OS, 31.5 months vs. 56.6 months, P=0.015) but not with RFS (P=0.135).
In rectal cancer subgroup, RIPK4 RCN was not associated with both OS and RFS (P=0.981, P=0.738).
RIPK4 RCN is significantly associated with OS in stage III( colon cancer patients receiving oxaliplatin-based chemotherapy and may be a novel biomarker that can predict the efficacy of oxaliplatin in colon cancer patients.
Aberrant expression of receptor interacting protein kinase 4 (RIPK4), a crucial regulatory protein of Wnt/Beta-catenin signaling, has recently been reported to be involved in several cancers.
Here, we report the potential clinical implication and biological functions of RIPK4 in cervical squamous cell carcinoma (CSCC).
RIPK4 expression increased significantly with disease progression from 3.2% in chronic cervicitis, 19.3% in LSILs and 85.1% in HSILs to 94.4% in CSCCs (P &lt; 0.001).
Knockdown of RIPK4 reduced cell migration and invasion via inhibition of Vimentin, MMP2 and Fibronectin expression in cervical cancer cells.
RIPK4 might act as a potential diagnostic and independent prognostic biomarker for CSCC patients.
We previously showed that protein kinase C-associated kinase (PKK, also known as DIK/RIP4), which belongs to the receptor-interacting protein (RIP) kinase family, mediates the B cell activating factor of the TNF family (BAFF)-induced NF-KB activation in diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL) cell lines.
Suppression of PKK expression by RNA interference inhibits phosphorylation of IKKAlfa and IKKBeta as well as activation of NF-KB in human cancer cell lines.
We propose that PKK may provide a critical link between IKK activation and various upstream signaling cascades, and may represent a potential target for inhibiting abnormal NF-KB activation in human cancers.
To assess RIPK4 expression in various differentiated TSCC and to determine its basic biological function.
A significantly higher level of RIPK4 was found in well-differentiated TSCC samples than in the poorly differentiated ones (p&lt;0.01).
In the present work we found a correlation between RIPK4 expression and TSCC degree of differentiation, age, and gender.
The better understanding of the molecular mechanism of RIPK4 in TSCC may provide a promising biomarker for tongue cancer prognosis and treatment.
Interestingly, maladaptive ECM remodeling was observed in early AVM without AVD and worsened with late AVD, as evidenced by increased MMP-2 and MMP-9 expression and activity, as well as abnormalities in ADAMTS-mediated versican processing.
In patients with aortic stenosis or the hemolytic-uremic syndrome, abnormally high levels of shear stress across the stenotic valve or in the microcirculation inflicted with thrombosis may promote cleavage of vWF by ADAMTS13, contributing to the loss of large multimers commonly observed among these patients.
The gene and protein expression profiles and protein distribution of six potential genetic biomarkers (i.e., CAPN6, COL1A2, COL3A1, GALA1, MT2A and MTNR1B) are presented here for both the early and terminal stages of scrapie in five different brain regions.
The distribution of the GALA1 was identified in glial cells from the cerebellum of scrapie-infected animals, GALA1 protein expression was increased in clinical animals in the majority of regions, and the increase of MT2A was in agreement with previous reports.
In conclusion, this study of gene transcription and protein expression and distribution confirm CAPN6, GALA1, MTNR1B and MT2A as potential targets for further prion disease research.
LincRNA-p21 could lead to pulmonary fibrosis in ARDS by inhibition of the expression of Thy-1.
LPS-induced pulmonary fibrosis was related with activation of HDAC, deacetylation of histone H3 and H4 and Thy-1 gene silencing.
HDAC inhibitor BA could inhibit LPS-induced pulmonary fibrosis and Thy-1 gene silencing through inhibiting activation of HDAC and deacetylation of histone H4.
SSc patients with pulmonary fibrosis (P = 0.006) and patients with PAH (P &lt; 0.001) had increased sCD90 serum concentrations compared to patients without the respective pulmonary manifestation of SSc.
Osteoporosis pseudoglioma syndrome (OPPGS) is a rare autosomal recessive genetic disorder characterised by congenital blindness and osteoporosis, caused by biallelic mutations in the LRP5 gene.
Molecular genetic examination detected the LRP5 gene for FEVR.
The majority of mutations identified in FEVR are found within four genes that encode the receptor complex (FZD4, LRP5, and TSPAN12) and ligand (NDP) of a molecular pathway that controls angiogenesis, the Norrin-Beta-catenin signaling pathway.
Primers were designed to amplify the coding exons and adjacent intronic regions of the FEVR-causing genes FZD4, LRP5, NDP and TSPAN12.
We identified five LRP5 mutations: three novel heterozygous mutations-p.M181R, p.R399S and p.G503R and two known mutations that were never reported in FEVR patients: p.R494Q and p.G876S.
Surprisingly, we then found mutations in familial exudative vitreoretinopathy (FEVR) genes; low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 5 mutations (six families), tetraspanin 12 mutations (two families), and NDP mutations (two families).
Therefore, this study aimed to determine the role of the Mdm2 SNIP 309 polymorphism in the gastric mucosal morphological patterns in patients with Helicobacter pylori associated gastritis.
Therefore, this study aimed to determine the correlation between the patterns of Mdm2 SNIP 309 and the inflammation grading of Helicobacter pylori associated gastritis in a Thai population.
Gastric mucosa from 100 patients with Helicobacter pylori associated gastritis was analyzed for MDM2 SNP309 using real-time PCR hybridization (light-cycler) probes.
While planning genomics, we describe that 11 well-known type 2 diabetes genetic risk variants (in TCF7L2, PPARG-P12A, KCNJ11, FTO, IGF2BP2, DUSP9, CENTD2, THADA, HHEX, CDKAL1, KCNQ1) showed similar associations compared to literature.
Associations between insulin-like growth factor 2 mRNA-binding protein 2 (IGF2BP2) rs11705701, insulin receptor substrate 1 rs7578326, gastric inhibitory polypeptide receptor rs10423928 and transcription factor 7-like 2 rs12255372 gene polymorphisms with prediabetes and type 2 diabetes (T2D) have not been evaluated in the Han Chinese population.
A breakdown analysis by gender revealed a significant association of IGF2BP2 rs11705701 with prediabetes under the dominant genetic model in females following application of the Bonferroni correction (odds ratio = 0.26; 95% confidence interval = 0.10-0.67; P=0.005).
The present case-control study reveals a significant association between IGF2BP2 rs11705701 and prediabetes in female patients.
Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) found that IGF2BP2 rs4402960 and rs1470579 polymorphisms were associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) risk.
Decreased expression of CHC1L is linked to pathogenesis and progression of both prostate cancer and multiple myeloma.
Recent studies of the RAN (6p21), ZHX-2 (8q24.3), CHC1L (13q14.3) loci highlight the importance of these genes in multiple myeloma (MM) prognosis and therapeutic applications.
Low expression levels of RAN, ZHX-2, and CHC1L were observed in myeloma patients, compared with peripheral blood lymphocytes and MOLP-8 cells.
RAN, ZHX2 and RCBTB2 (CHC1L) expression was evaluated by quantitative real time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction in plasma cells from 85 monoclonal gammopathies: 58 symptomatic multiple myeloma (MM) (52 untreated, six relapsed), eight smouldering MM, five monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance, four plasma cell leukaemias and 10 myeloid cell lines.
BCCIP deficiency impaired embryonic and postnatal neural development, causing severe ataxia, cerebral and cerebellar defects, and microcephaly.
Phosphorylation also links HS1 to multiple signaling proteins, including Lck, PLCgamma1, and Vav1, and is essential for the stable recruitment of Vav1 to the IS.
On the other hand, we confirmed previously mapped Lck SH3 binding sites in ADAM15, HS1, SLP76, and NS5A, and identified putative Lck SH3 binding sites of Sam68, FasL, c-Cbl, and Cbl-b.
The SH2 domains of ZAP70, SHP-1 and PLC gamma 1 and the SH3 domains of lck, vav and HS1 did not bind to pp85--90.
These analyses identified several cellular proteins inside HIV-1: elongation factor 1alpha, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, HS-1, phosphatidylethanolamine-binding protein, Pin1, Lck, Nm23-H1, and the C-terminal tail of CD43.
We find that the Src homology 3 domains of Grb2 directly associate, in vitro and in vivo, with murine hemopoietic specific protein 1 (HS1), a protein identical to Lck-binding protein 1.
Because HS1 associates with the p56(lck) and p59(lyn) tyrosine kinases in vitro and in vivo, and becomes tyrosine phosphorylated upon various receptor stimulations, our present data suggest that HS1 mediates linkage between Lck or Lyn and Grb2 in lymphoid lineage cells.
With this method, we previously isolated an Lck tyrosine kinase-associated protein, LckBP1, which is identical to HS1 (Kitamura et al., 1989, 1995; Takemoto et al., 1995).
We have previously found that purine-rich element binding protein, PURalpha, was significantly repressed in androgen-independent prostate cancer cell lines in comparison to an androgen-dependent line.
Moreover, over-expressing PURalpha in androgen-independent prostate cancer cells attenuated their cell proliferation.
These findings suggest that regulation of PURalpha expression in prostate cancer cells may serve as a therapeutic target for hormone refractory prostate cancer.
We investigated the effects of the DNA damage-inducing cancer chemotherapeutic agent cisplatin on mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEFs) from PURA(-/-) knockout mice that lack Puralpha.
Moreover, PURalpha was decreased in its expression both at the protein and mRNA levels in the androgen-independent prostate cancer cell lines, PC3 and DU145 in comparison to LNCaP cells.
Frequent SIs were pneumonia (15.9%), cellulitis (9.9%), and sepsis (5.0%).
We additionally show that pulmonary fibrosis in MyD88-KO mice was associated with the accumulation of pro-fibrotic regulatory T lymphocytes (T regs) and pro-fibrotic cytokine expression (TGF-Beta, IL-10 and PDGF-B), not with T helper (Th) 17 cell influx.
The aim of our investigation was to analyze the pattern of interleukin-1 (IL-1) family compounds: IL-1 beta, IL-1 receptor accessory protein (Acp), IL-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1Ra) and IL-1 receptor type II (IL-1RII) in the serum and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) from 67 multiple sclerosis (MS) patients and 31 controls.
Partial loss of IFT80 function leads Jeune asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy (JATD) or short-rib polydactyly (SRP) syndrome type III, displaying narrow thoracic cavity and multiple cartilage anomalies.
Partial mutation of intraflagellar transport 80 (IFT80) in humans causes Jeune asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy (JATD) and short-rib polydactyly (SRP) syndrome type III.
Partial mutation of IFT80 in humans causes diseases such as Jeune asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy (JATD) and short rib polydactyly (SRP) type III with abnormal skeletal development.
Jeune's asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy (JATD) is an autosomal recessive disorder with symptoms of retinal degeneration, kidney cysts, and chondrodysplasia and results from mutations in the ift80 gene.
IL-33 is associated with a variety of autoimmune diseases, such as sclerosis, inflammatory bowel disease, and rheumatoid arthritis.
IL-33 was significantly higher in BD patients (101.2+/-20.1pg/ml) as compared to healthy controls (31.5+/-10.5 pg/ml) but lower than rheumatoid arthritis patients (132.5+/-19.1 pg/ml).
It has been shown that the administration of interleukin-33 exacerbates collagen-induced arthritis in experimental models, and a positive correlation between cytokine concentrations in serum and synovial fluid of patients with rheumatoid arthritis and disease activity was found.
This review discusses evidence for the role of interleukin-33 with a focus on rheumatoid arthritis.
The antigenic protein spots reacted against sera from clonorchiasis patients and were identified as cysteine proteases, glutathione transferases, gelsolin, propionyl-CoA carboxylase (PCC), prohibitin and 14-3-3 protein (14-3-3) using LC-coupled ESI-MS/MS and an EST database for C. sinensis.
To report the effect of intravitreal bevacizumab in type 2 idiopathic macular telangiectasia (type 2 IMT).
To identify the possible biological roles of keratinocyte growth factor (KGF), connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) and transforming growth factor-Beta (TGF-Beta) in cyclosporine-A (CsA) and phenytoin (PNT)-induced gingival overgrowth (GO) and to correlate them with each other.
Keratinocyte growth factor (KGF) and scatter factor (SF) are fibroblast-derived growth factors with potent mitogenic and motogenic effects on epithelial cells, and, therefore, could be involved in the pathogenesis of gingival overgrowth.
These results suggest that KGF and SF may have an important role in cyclosporin-induced gingival overgrowth.
On return to the district to calve, 54% of calves from herd 1 and 30% of calves from herd 2 were affected with congenital arthrogryposis or hydranencephaly caused by Akabane virus infection.
Twelve patients with classic radiologic and histologic features of MO, 6 with brown tumors, and 5 with cherubism diagnosed at our institution were studied for the presence of USP6 rearrangements using fluorescence in situ hybridization with probes flanking the USP6 locus on chromosome 17p13.
None of the patients with brown tumor or cherubism demonstrated USP6 rearrangements.
In contrast, no USP6 rearrangements were found in patients with cherubism or brown tumor, supporting the prevailing view that these lesions are distinct biologic entities.
Consistent with findings in mice, marked alterations in nuclear envelope morphology, abnormal localization of RanGAP1, and nuclear accumulation of mRNA were found in cortex of Huntington's disease patients.
Double immunofluorescent analyses revealed nuclear retention and apparent colocalization of RanGap1 with Nup205, Gp210 with Nup205, and partial colocalization of Nup205 with Nup107; most of the ischemic changes above were similar to those observed in patients with C9orf72-genetic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Detection of the expression of these proteins and genes encoding these proteins in human gastric cancer tissues by real-time PCR (RT-qPCR) and western blot revealed that the expression of Beta-ACTIN, LDH, DLD, PRPF19 and CaM genes were up-regulated and RanGAP was down-regulated in gastric cancer tissues and/or metastatic lymph nodes compared to peri-cancerous tissues.
Stable coronary artery disease (SCAD) patients scheduled for PCI were randomized to one of the three study arms: 1) genotyping, 2) PFT, and 3) control and evaluated by the CYP2C19 allele genotyping and PFT with P2Y12 assay.
To assess the association of CYP2C19 G681A, P2RY12 H1/H2, and ITGB3 T1565C polymorphisms with the extent of platelet aggregation in patients with coronary heart disease (CHD) during antiplatelet therapy.
This shortening of the HuR mRNA 3'-UTR via alternative polyadenylation (APA) was observed to be dependent on cleavage stimulation factor subunit 2 (CSTF2/CstF-64), which is up-regulated in the TAMR breast cancer cells.
Moreover, CSTF2, POLA1, HMOX2, and EFNB2 may be associated with the prognosis of bladder cancer patient.
Accordingly, RNAi-induced silencing of CSTF2 decreased the proliferative rate of cancer cells.
Immunohistochemical staining using tissue microarray consisting of 327 lung cancers was applied to examine the expression of CSTF2 protein and its prognostic value.
A role of CSTF2 in cancer cell growth was examined by siRNA experiments.
Immunohistochemical analysis using tissue microarray showed an association of strong CSTF2 expression with poor prognosis of patients with non-small cell lung cancer (P = 0.0079), and multivariate analysis showed that CSTF2 positivity is an independent prognostic factor.
In addition, suppression of CSTF2 expression by siRNAs suppressed lung cancer cell growth, whereas exogenous expression of CSTF2 promoted growth and invasion of mammalian cells.
Immunohistochemical PD-L1 expression was evaluated in 84 vSCCs with previously defined status of p16 and DNA-HPV, infiltration of immune cells: CD8+, CD4+, FOXP3+, CD56+, CD68+, and GZB+ cells.
CD163, as a promising TAMs marker, is superior to CD68 for predicting the malignant transformation and metastatic potential of cervical cancer.
Immunohistochemistry analysis of cellular immune parameters (CD4+ or CD8+ T cells, CIITA, MHC-II and CD68) was performed on NMU-induced rat mammary tumor nodules, followed by evaluation of the serum level of 34 cytokines using the cytokine antibody array.
Immunohistochemistry was performed to determine PD-L1 tumor cell expression and to enumerate CD8, CD4 and CD68 tumor-infiltrating leucocytes (TIL) in a cohort of 443 breast cancers categorized by molecular subtype.
These findings demonstrate, for the first time, a novel capacity of a P-Alexa647-FA conjugate to colocalize to CD11b+CD68+ TAMs in both primary and metastatic breast tumors.
We used breast tumor tissues from each patient to make tissue microarrays that were then stained for leukocyte and myeloid markers including CD4, CD8, CD20, CD25, CD68, and CD163 using immunohistochemical techniques.
Characterisation of most mutations found in CLCN2 in patients with CC2L leukodystrophy show that they cause a reduction in function of the chloride channel ClC-2.
GlialCAM, a regulatory subunit of ClC-2 in glial cells and involved in the leukodystrophy megalencephalic leukoencephalopathy with subcortical cysts (MLC), increases the activity of a ClC-2 mutant by affecting ClC-2 gating and by stabilising the mutant at the plasma membrane.
We suggest that leukodystrophy-causing CLCN2 mutations reduce the functional expression of ClC-2, which is partly counteracted by GlialCAM/MLC1-mediated increase in the gating and stability of the channel.
The review then discusses the diseases associated with ClC-2, including degeneration of the retina, Sjoegren's syndrome, age-related cataracts, degeneration of the testes, azoospermia, lung cancer, constipation, repair of impaired intestinal mucosa barrier, leukemia, cystic fibrosis, leukoencephalopathy, epilepsy and diabetes mellitus.
A subset of these genes has been implicated in other neurobehavioral disorders including depression (SLIT3), epilepsy (CLCN2, PRICKLE1), intellectual disability (AP4M1), schizophrenia (WDR60), and Tourette syndrome (OFCC1).
Epilepsy with grand mal on awakening (EGMA) is a well-defined subtype of idiopathic generalized epilepsy.
Additionally, using global gene expression analysis of partially reprogrammed cells, we identified SNAI3 as a novel invasion-related marker in human melanoma.
SNAI3 expression correlates with tumor thickness in primary melanomas and thus, may be of prognostic value.
Effective silencing of Runx2 by short interfering RNA (siRNA) demonstrated downregulation of EMT-related molecules (SNAI2, SNAI3 and TWIST1), MMP2 and vasculogenic factors (VEGFA and VEGFC) in thyroid carcinoma cells.
Thyroid-stimulating hormone levels, goiter and thyroid dysfunction were higher in children who were anti-TPO1 than in diabetic children without thyroid autoimmunity.
Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) can be used to detect rearrangements that cause Alfa-thalassemia, particularly large deletions involving the whole Alfa cluster and/or deletions in the HS-40 region.
In addition to the -Alfa3.7 deletion identified in the patients with Hb H disease, four different Alfa0 deletions removing 15 to 225 kb DNA segments were found: two of them remove both the Alfa genes, one affects only the regulatory element (HS-40) region, and another one extends over the entire Alfa cluster and the HS-40 region.
The impact of urinary VDBP and KIM-1 on MARE was independent of known CIN risk factors such as anemia, preexisting renal failure, preexisting heart failure, and diabetes.
The data show that a tandem Maf recognition element (MARE) in locus control region (LCR) hypersensitive site 2 (HS2) reveals a remarkably high degree of occupancy during differentiation of mouse erythroleukemia cells.
Targeting of an artificial zinc finger DNA-binding domain (ZF-DBD) to the HS2 tandem MARE caused a reduction in the association of MARE-binding proteins and transcription complexes at LCR HS2 and the adult Betamajor-globin gene promoter but did not affect expression of the Betaminor-globin gene.
The data demonstrate that a stable MARE-associated footprint in LCR HS2 is important for the recruitment of transcription complexes to the adult Betamajor-globin gene promoter during erythroid cell differentiation.
Next, we demonstrate that CD172a(+)Slan DCs that produced IL-1Beta and TNF-Alfa accumulated in mLNs and colons of CD patients.
In conclusion, we propose that proinflammatory CD14(bright)CD172a(+)Slan DCs are a distinguishing feature between CD and UC, as these cells accumulate uniquely in mLNs and colonic mucosa of CD patients.
Here, we show that CD172a(+)CD11c(+) cells accumulate in the mesenteric lymph nodes (mLNs) and inflamed intestinal mucosa in patients with Crohn's disease (CD).
An avidity-improved CD47 fusion protein (CD47-Var1) suppresses the release of a wide array of inflammatory cytokines by CD172a(+) cells, which may include HLA-DR(-)CD172a(+) neutrophils, in inflamed colonic explant cultures and impairs the ability of HLA-DR(+)CD172a(+) cells to activate memory Th17 but not Th1 responses in mLNs.
We first show that mucosal CD103(-) DCs selectively express SIRPalpha and that their frequency was augmented in the lamina propria and mLNs of mice that developed Th17-biased colitis in response to trinitrobenzene sulfonic acid.
CD47 expression was required on the SIRPalpha(+)CD103(-) DCs for efficient trafficking to mLNs in vivo, whereas it was dispensable on both DCs and T cells for Th17 polarization in vitro.
Effects of Ca2+ and calmodulin on the adenylate cyclase activity of a prolactin and growth hormone-producing pituitary tumor cell strain (GH3) were examined.
The control of PTG hyperplasia is most important in the management of secondary hyperparathyroidism (SHPT), because the advanced stage of hyperplasia is considered irreversible.
Control of secondary hyperparathyroidism (SHPT) using active vitamin D analogues becomes difficult in advanced SHPT, because the enlarged parathyroid glands (PTGs) are resistant to medical therapy.
The long-term effect of cinacalcet hydrochloride treatment on parathyroid gland (PTG) volume has been scarcely investigated in patients with moderate to advanced secondary hyperparathyroidism (SHPT).
It has been suggested that microRNA-9 (miR-9) is associated with the development of knee osteoarthritis (OA).
X-linked hypophosphatemia (XLH), autosomal dominant HR (ADHR), and autosomal recessive HR (ARHR) are examples of hereditary forms of HR, which are mainly caused by mutations in the phosphate regulating endopeptidase homolog, X-linked (PHEX), FGF23, and, dentin matrix protein-1 (DMP1) and ecto-nucleotide pyro phosphatase/phosphodiesterase 1 (ENPP1) genes, respectively.
Homozygous inactivating mutations in DMP1 (dentin matrix protein 1), the gene encoding a noncollagenous bone matrix protein expressed in osteoblasts and osteocytes, cause autosomal recessive hypophosphatemia (ARHP).
An autosomal recessive form of hypophosphatemia (ARHP) was recently shown to be caused by homozygous mutations in DMP1, the gene encoding dentin matrix protein-1 (DMP-1), a non-collagenous bone matrix protein with an important role in the development and mineralization of bone and teeth.
Among various causes of low serum phosphorous are inherited disorders associated with increased urinary excretion of phosphate, including autosomal dominant hypophosphatemic rickets (ADHR), X-linked hypophosphatemia (XLH), autosomal recessive hypophosphatemia (ARHP), and hereditary hypophosphatemic rickets with hypercalciuria (HHRH).
Recently, positional cloning approaches furthermore led to the identification of homozygous inactivating mutations in dentin matrix protein 1 (DMP1) as the cause of an autosomal recessive form of hypophosphatemia.
Pharmacological treatment of SOD1(G37R) mice with minocycline, a compound that attenuates microgliosis and slows down disease, lessened the dysregulation of Cdk5/Cdk4 and the phosphorylation of Rb.
Seventeen molecules, including transcription factor E2F, T-cell-specific transcription factor, Src (known as "proto-oncogene tyrosine-protein kinase of sarcoma"), interferon regulatory factor 1, thymidylate synthase, cyclin B, cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) 4, CDK, caspase-1, vitamin D receptor, histone deacetylase, MAPK/ERK kinase, bcl-2-associated X protein, runt-related transcription factor 1, PR domain zinc finger protein 1, platelet-derived growth factor receptor, and interleukin 1, were identified as candidate molecules.
Therefore, targeting the caspase-1/PPARGamma/MCAD pathway might be a promising therapeutic approach to prevent tumor progression.Tumor associated macrophages (TAMs) promote cancer progression.
Here, the author show that caspase-1 promotes TAMs differentiation by attenuating medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase activity and that inhibition of this axis results in suppression of tumour growth in a transgenic mouse model of breast cancer.
Ensuing western blotting or immunostaining results showed that Rictor/mTORC2 signaling was activated in kidney interstitial myofibroblasts from mice with unilateral ureteral obstruction.
Compared with control littermates, the kidneys of Rictor knockout mice developed less interstitial extracellular matrix deposition and inflammatory cell infiltration at 1 or 2 weeks after ureteral obstruction.
Less progression of Hoffa-synovitis and effusion-synovitis was observed in the TG-C group compared to placebo (9.6% vs. 21.1%, adjusted RR 0.5, 95%CI [0.2,1.2], p = 0.115).
Intraarticular treatment with TG-C showed fewer patients in the treated group with progression in structural OA features and other MRI-defined inflammatory markers such as Hoffa-synovitis and effusion-synovitis.
A total of 104 patients (89.4% females) fulfilling the 1990 ACR criteria for FMS and the Rome III criteria for IBS classification and 125 unrelated age- and sex-matched IBS patients without FMS underwent the following studies: haematological, coagulation and biochemistry tests, serological and genetic markers for CD (i.e., tissue transglutaminase 2 (tTG-2) and major histocompatibility complex HLA-DQ2/HLA-DQ8), multiple gastric and duodenal biopsies, FMS tender points (TPs), Fibromyalgia Impact Questionnaire (FIQ), Health Assessment Questionnaire (HAQ), 36-Item Short Form Health Survey (SF-36) and Visual Analogue Scales (VASs) for tiredness and gastrointestinal complaints.
GFD effectiveness was assessed at baseline and after 1 year, examining the score changes in the Tender Points (TPs) test, Fibromyalgia Impact Questionnaire (FIQ), Health Assessment Questionnaire (HAQ), Short Form Health Survey (SF-36), Visual Analogue Scales (VAS) for gastrointestinal complaints, pain and tiredness, drug prescriptions and tissue-Trans-Glutaminase (tTG) serum levels.
Non-organ specific AAb (ANA, anti-Ro52, anti-Ro60, anti-La, anti-RNP) but not anti-thyroid peroxidase, anti-tissue transglutaminase or myositis-specific antibodies, were more frequent in s-IBM patients, and 14/51 (27%) had another autoimmune disease (Sjoegren's syndrome, thyroiditis, psoriasis, vitiligo).
By applying CD146 and CD105 antibodies on human retinas from glaucomatous eyes, CD146-positive retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) were found, some being placed in perivascular positions; ongoing processes of neurites extension were related to these neurons.
These results support the hypothesis that in glaucoma eyes the CD146-positive RGCs result from regenerative processes driven by stem cells in the retinal perivascular niches.
CD146/MCAM and CD166/ALCAM, previously unreported in cells from fvERMs, were also expressed.
Two new and potentially promising melanocytic markers, microphthalmia transcription factor (MiTF) and melanoma cell adhesion molecule (Mel-CAM), have been shown to be sensitive markers of epithelioid melanoma, but have not been tested in desmoplastic/spindle cell melanoma or in other rare melanocytic neuroectodermal tumors such as clear cell sarcoma.
We investigated the effect of carnosine as an adjuvant therapy on urinary albumin excretion (UAE), the tubular damage marker alpha 1-microglobulin (A1M), and oxidative stress in pediatric patients with type 1 diabetes and nephropathy.
The following parameters were measured in 377 patients with type 2 diabetes: HbA1c, serum concentrations of 1,5-AG, GA and creatinine, hemoglobin, urinary albumin/creatinine ratio, and urinary excretion of Alfa1 -microglobulin (A1M).
Vonoprazan Fumarate (TAK-438F) is a new and effective drug approved in Japan in 2014 for treatment and prevention of acid-related diseases (ARDs), which exhibits many advantages compared with traditional proton-pump inhibitors (PPIs).
In many countries, the introduction of generic proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) onto the pharmaceutical market increased the phenomenon of therapeutic substitution in acid-related disorders (ARDs).
We present confirmatory evidence for a role of dystonia genes that had not yet been unequivocally established including PRKRA, TUBB4A, ANO3, and TAF1.
ANO3 encodes anoctamin-3, a Ca+2-dependent phospholipid scramblase expressed in striatal-neurons, that has been implicated in autosomal dominant craniocervical dystonia (Dystonia-24, DYT24, MIM# 615034).
Three genes (GCH1, THAP1, TOR1A) were associated with isolated generalized dystonia, whereas 2 (ANO3, ADCY5) gave rise to combined dystonia-myoclonus phenotypes.
Furthermore, it provides confirmatory evidence for a dystonia-relevant role of ANO3 and ADCY5, both of which likely associate with a broader spectrum of dystonic expressions than previously thought.
In the past 4 years, the definition and classification of dystonia have been revised, and new genes have been identified in patients with isolated hereditary dystonia (DYT23, DYT24, and DYT25).
Compromised anoctamin function is causing a wide range of diseases, such as hearing loss (ANO2), bleeding disorder (ANO6), ataxia and dystonia (ANO3, 10), persistent borrelia and mycobacteria infection (ANO10), skeletal syndromes like gnathodiaphyseal dysplasia and limb girdle muscle dystrophy (ANO5), and cancer (ANO1, 6, 7).
Some genes, such as ANO3, GNAL and CIZ1, have been discovered for isolated dystonia, but they are probably not a common cause of classic cervical dystonia.
Clinical and genetic heterogeneity also characterizes myoclonus-dystonia, which includes not only the classical phenotype associated with epsilon-sarcoglycan mutations but rarely also presentation of ANO3 gene mutations, TITF1 gene mutations typically underlying benign hereditary chorea, and some dopamine synthesis pathway conditions due to GCH1 and TH mutations.
When 10 cases of M5 were subdivided by the differential level into undifferentiated (M5a) and differentiated monocytic leukemia (M5b), expression of CD45RA and CD45RO was strictly restricted to cases with M5a and M5b, respectively.
In this review, we describe the fusion genes recently reported in bone and soft-tissue tumors such as solitary fibrous tumor, aneurysmal bone cyst, nodular fasciitis, CIC-DUX4 fusion gene-positive small round cell tumors, or BCOR-CCNB3-positive sarcoma as well as other genetic aberrations in dedifferentiated liposarcoma, malignant rhabdoid tumor, cartilaginous tumor, Langerhans cell histiocytosis chondroblastoma, or giant cell tumor of the bone.
The individual diagnostic marker positivity was 98% for GATA-binding protein 3, 95% for androgen receptor, 90% for progesterone receptor, 88% for deleted in pancreatic cancer 4, 75% for gross cystic disease fluid protein 15, 72% for cytokeratin 7, 55% for mammaglobin, and 15% for vimentin and Wilms tumor protein 1.
Astrocyte loss may be caused by cytotoxic T cells as seen in Rasmussen encephalitis, auto-antibodies such as in neuromyelitis optica (aquaporin-4 antibodies), or cytokines such as TNF-Alfa in major depressive disorder.
Mutations in KCNJ5, ATP1A1, ATP2B3 and CACNA1D are found in aldosterone producing adenoma (APA) and familial hyperaldosteronism (FH).
Our results suggest that these mutations, in addition to mutations in the KCNJ5 gene and other genes such as ATP1A1, ATP2B3 and CACNA1D, may be responsible for the tumorigenesis of APAs and CPAs with subclinical Cushing's syndrome.
Screening of SOX2 was completed in 89 patients with a variety of ocular anomalies, including 28 with A/M and 61 with normal eye size and anterior segment dysgenesis (28), cataract (14), isolated coloboma (5), or other eye disorders (14).
The overexpression of Kir3.2, a subunit of the G protein-gated inwardly rectifying K(+) channel, is implicated in some of the neurological phenotypes of Down syndrome (DS).
Keppen-Lubinsky syndrome (KPLBS) is a rare disease mainly characterized by severe developmental delay and intellectual disability, microcephaly, large prominent eyes, a narrow nasal bridge, a tented upper lip, a high palate, an open mouth, tightly adherent skin, an aged appearance, and severe generalized lipodystrophy.
We sequenced the exomes of three unrelated individuals affected by KPLBS and found de novo heterozygous mutations in KCNJ6 (GIRK2), which encodes an inwardly rectifying potassium channel and maps to the Down syndrome critical region between DIRK1A and DSCR4.
We evaluated the impact of glucose-lysine Maillard reaction products (Glc-Lys MRPs) on colitis, induced in rats by an administration of 5% dextran sulfate sodium (DSS) in drinking water.
Glc-Lys MRPs ameliorate DSS-induced colitis, as determined by a decrease in disease index activity, colon weight/length ratio, nitric oxide levels in serum, recovery of body weight loss, colon length and serum lysozyme levels.
This study was aimed at determining whether repeated low-level exposure to MRPs, generated via two different heat treatments, can contribute to the modulation of experimental colitis in mice.
Furthermore, we used a sandwich immunoassay to measure serum concentrations of MRPs in 62 patients were simultaneously assessed by the Crohn's disease activity index (CDAI) and the severity activity index of Goebell (SAI).
In the present study monospecific antibodies against MRPs were used to investigate immunohistochemically the distribution of these proteins in routinely processed bowel tissues from 23 patients with ulcerative colitis (UC).
The dimeric hybrid-IgG/IgA inhibited the binding of digoxigenin-conjugated Stx1B to natural ligands (CD77) displayed on Burkitt's lymphoma cell line Ramos.
Furthermore, the purified Stx1 B subunit was able to bind specifically to Gb3Cer expressed on Burkitt's lymphoma cells.
Furthermore, we found that Mcl-1 could be a potential therapeutic target of MECK-induced apoptosis and its stability is regulated by extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1/2 (ERK1/2) signaling MECK can be used as a safe and efficient therapeutic alternative for the treatment of salivary gland cancer.
RelA-/-Fadd-/-Rip3-/- triple-knockout (TKO) and RelA-/-Rip1K45A/K45A mice displayed bacterial pneumonia leading to death ~2 wk after birth.
Antibiotic treatment improved bacterial pneumonia, extended the lifespan of TKO and RelA-/-Rip1K45A/K45A mice, and alleviated skin inflammation in RelA-/-Rip1K45A/K45A mice.
Although NF-KB RelA (p65) is essential for the expression of many cytokines during pneumonia, its targeted mutation in the lung epithelium was inconsequential for pneumonia-driven LIF induction.
Overall, our data suggest a signaling axis whereby activation of NF-KB RelA in myeloid cells promotes epithelial LIF induction during lung infections, representing a means through which these two cell types collaborate to improve tissue resilience during pneumonia.
Sectm1 was induced during the early stages of pneumococcal pneumonia, and mutation of NF-KB RelA in epithelial cells did not diminish its expression.
To determine the functional significance of the hepatic APR during pneumonia, we challenged APR-null mice lacking hepatocyte signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) and v-rel avian reticuloendotheliosis viral oncogene homolog A (RelA) with Escherichia coli in the airspaces.
Epithelial cells expressed multiple neutrophil-stimulating cytokines during pneumonia, all of which depended on RelA.
Epithelial RelA mutation decreased whole lung levels of CXCL5 and GM-CSF during pneumococcal pneumonia, whereas lung levels of other neutrophil-recruiting factors were unaffected.
We demonstrate that RelA-P-Ser536 is a feature of human lung and skin fibroblasts, but not lung epithelial cells, in vitro and is present in sclerotic skin and diseased lungs of patients suffering from idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis.
Because innate immunity gene induction depends on NF-KB RelA (also known as p65) during pneumonia, we generated a murine model of RelA mutated throughout the alveolar epithelium.
Sorted cell populations from mouse lungs revealed that CXCL5 was induced during pneumonia in type I cells, which did not require RelA.
These are also, to our knowledge, the first evidence for entirely RelA-independent pathways of innate immunity gene induction in any cell during pneumonia.
We review the literature of genetic PD autopsies from cases with molecularly confirmed PD or parkinsonism and summarize main findings on SNCA (n = 25), Parkin (n = 20, 17 bi-allelic and 3 heterozygotes), PINK1 (n = 5, 1 bi-allelic and 4 heterozygotes), DJ-1 (n = 1), LRRK2 (n = 55), GBA (n = 10 Gaucher disease patients with parkinsonism), DNAJC13, GCH1, ATP13A2, PLA2G6 (n = 8 patients, 2 with PD), MPAN (n = 2), FBXO7, RAB39B, and ATXN2 (SCA2), as well as on 22q deletion syndrome (n = 3).
We performed genetic testing consisting of C9orf72 hexanucleotide expansion, ATXN2 polyglutamine (polyQ) expansion, and targeted next generation sequencing using the ONDRISeq, a gene panel consisting of 80 genes known to be associated with neurodegenerative diseases such as ALS, FTD, Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, and vascular cognitive impairment.
Pathological developments leading to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) are associated with misbehavior of several key proteins, such as SOD1 (superoxide dismutase 1), TARDBP/TDP-43, FUS, C9orf72, and dipeptide repeat proteins generated as a result of the translation of the intronic hexanucleotide expansions in the C9orf72 gene, PFN1 (profilin 1), GLE1 (GLE1, RNA export mediator), PURA (purine rich element binding protein A), FLCN (folliculin), RBM45 (RNA binding motif protein 45), SS18L1/CREST, HNRNPA1 (heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein A1), HNRNPA2B1 (heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein A2/B1), ATXN2 (ataxin 2), MAPT (microtubule associated protein tau), and TIA1 (TIA1 cytotoxic granule associated RNA binding protein).
Spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 (SCA2) is an autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxia that occurs as a consequence of abnormal CAG expansions in the ATXN2 gene.
Recent findings linking ataxin-2 intermediate expansions to other neurodegenerative diseases such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis have provided insights into the ataxin-2-related toxicity mechanism in neurodegenerative diseases and have raised new ethical challenges to molecular predictive diagnosis of SCA2.
Spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 (SCA2) is among the most common forms of autosomal dominant ataxias, accounting for 15% of the total families.
Spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 (SCA2) is due to a CAG expansion (CAGexp) at ATXN2.
Expansion of polyglutamine trinucleotide (CAG) within ATXN2 gene with 35 or more repeats, results in spinocerebellar ataxia type-2.
Recent studies have identified the RNA-binding protein Ataxin-2 as a genetic determinant or risk factor for various diseases including spinocerebellar ataxia type II (SCA2) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), amongst others.
Here we show that synaptobrevin 2 sorting involves determinants within its SNARE motif that are recognized by the ANTH domains of the endocytic adaptors AP180 and clathrin assembly lymphoid myeloid leukemia (CALM).
Specifically, fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3), desmoglein 2 (DSG2), E3 ubiquitin ligase c-CBL (casitas B-cell lymphoma), cancer/testis antigen NY-ESO-1 (CTAG1A/B), undifferentiated embryonic cell transcription factor 1 (UTF1) and synaptosomal-associated protein, 91 kDa homolog (SNAP91) were shown to represent specific biomarkers of human spermatogonia.
Recently, the gene encoding clathrin assembly protein of lymphoid myeloid leukemia (CALM), which is homologous to the AP180, was cloned from rat brain, and its expression differential to AP180 was reported (Kim and Lee, 1999).
The clathrin assembly protein lymphoid myeloid leukemia (CALM) gene, encodes a homologoue of the neuronal clathrin assembly protein AP180.
The clathrin assembly lymphoid myeloid leukemia (CALM) gene encodes a putative homologue of the clathrin assembly synaptic protein AP180.
The expression level of ERp57 was also elevated in rat insulinoma INS-1 cells by inducible knock-down of the atg7-gene.
Tissue specimens of nine dental follicles and 69 ameloblastomas were immunohistochemically examined with antibodies against ATG7, LC3, and p62.
Immunohistochemical reactivity for ATG7, LC3, and p62 was detected in many odontogenic epithelial cells and several endothelial cells and fibroblasts in dental follicles and ameloblastomas.
Expression of ATG7, LC3, and p62 was found markedly in neoplastic cells near the basement membrane rather than central polyhedral cells in ameloblastomas.
Expression of ATG7, LC3, and p62 in dental follicles and ameloblastomas suggests that autophagy regulation might be affected by microenvironment alterations during tumorigenesis.
Atg7 deficiency alters progression of Braf(V600E)-driven tumors from adenomas (Braf(V600E); atg7(-/-)) and adenocarcinomas (trp53(-/-); Braf(V600E); atg7(-/-)) to benign oncocytomas that accumulated morphologically and functionally defective mitochondria, suggesting that defects in mitochondrial metabolism may compromise continued tumor growth.
At later stages of tumorigenesis, Atg7 deficiency resulted in an accumulation of defective mitochondria, proliferative defects, reduced tumor burden, conversion of adenomas and adenocarcinomas to oncocytomas, and increased mouse life span.
Using genetically engineered mouse models (GEMMs) for human non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC), we found that deletion of the essential autophagy gene, Atg7, in KRAS(G12D)-driven NSCLC inhibits tumor growth and converts adenomas and adenocarcinomas to benign oncocytomas characterized by the accumulation of respiration-defective mitochondria.
atg7 loss altered tumor fate from adenomas and carcinomas to oncocytomas-rare, predominantly benign tumors characterized by the accumulation of defective mitochondria.
Subsequent studies demonstrated that Atg5(-/-) and Atg7(-/-) livers give rise to adenomas, Atg4C(-/-) mice are susceptible to chemical carcinogenesis, and Bif1(-/-) mice are prone to spontaneous tumors, indicating that autophagy defects promote tumorigenesis.
Scavenger receptor class A, member 3 (SCARA3) was previously found to be overexpressed in ovarian/primary peritoneal carcinoma (OC/PPC) compared with breast carcinoma effusions by global gene expression analysis.
p15RS is a ubiquitously expressed nuclear protein that is positively regulated by p15 and, in turn, inhibits the expression of cyclin D and cyclin E. To determine whether p15RS has malignancy inhibitory functions in addition to its inhibitory effects on cell cycle entry, we ectopically expressed p15RS in metastatic melanoma A375 cells, in which p15 gene is deleted and p15RS expression is dramatically downregulated, and examined the effect on various malignant phenotypes.
Wilms' tumor 1-associating protein (WTAP) has been reported to be a ubiquitously expressed nuclear protein.
The results showed that TCF7L2 polymorphism was associated with breast cancer (Homogeneous model: OR=1.17, 95%CI=1.02-1.35, I (2) =21.8%, p for heterogeneity=0.276; Heterogeneous model: OR=1.11, 95%CI=1.03-1.20, I (2) =0.0%, p for heterogeneity=0.543), prostate cancer (Homogeneous model: OR=0.89, 95%CI=0.84-0.96, I (2) =0.0%, p for heterogeneity=0.640; Heterogeneous model: OR=0.89, 95%CI=0.84-0.95, I (2) =0.0%, p for heterogeneity=0.871), and colon cancer (Heterogeneous model: OR=1.15, 95%CI=1.01-1.31, I (2) =0.0%, p for heterogeneity=0.658), but not with colorectal cancer, lung cancer, and ovarian cancer.
The present meta-analysis indicated that there were significantly associations between the TCF7L2 rs7903146 polymorphism and risk of breast, prostate and colon cancers, rather than colorectal cancer, lung cancer, and ovarian cancer.
Mutations in the gene encoding comparative gene identification 58 (CGI-58), also known as Alfa Beta hydrolase domain-containing 5 (ABHD5), cause neutral lipid storage disorder with ichthyosis (NLSDI).
It has been elucidated that, of the ichthyosis-causative genes, ABCA12, ALOXE3, ALOX12B, CYP4F22, CERS3, ABHD5, PNPLA1 and ELOVL4 work in the formation of the corneocyte lipid envelope (CLE), a structure that is essential to sound skin barrier function.
We discuss known inborn errors of CTGM, including deficiencies of: AGPAT2 (a form of generalized lipodystrophy), LPIN1 (childhood rhabdomyolysis), LPIN2 (an inflammatory condition, Majeed syndrome, described elsewhere in this issue), DGAT1 (protein loosing enteropathy), perilipin 1 (partial lipodystrophy), CGI-58 (gene ABHD5, neutral lipid storage disease (NLSD) with ichthyosis and "Jordan's anomaly" of vacuolated polymorphonuclear leukocytes), adipose triglyceride lipase (ATGL, gene PNPLA2, NLSD with myopathy, cardiomyopathy and Jordan's anomaly), hormone-sensitive lipase (HSL, gene LIPE, hypertriglyceridemia, and insulin resistance).
In current study, we have discovered, using a comprehensive investigative regimen, a novel and tissue-specific role of claudin-3, a tight junction integral protein, in inhibiting colon cancer progression by serving as the common rheostat of Stat-3 and Wnt-signaling activation.
Claudin-3-/- mice revealed dedifferentiated and leaky colonic epithelium, and developed invasive adenocarcinoma when subjected to colon cancer.
Wnt-signaling hyperactivation, albeit in GSK-3Beta independent manner, differentiated colon cancer in claudin-3-/- mice versus WT-mice.
Genetic and pharmacological studies confirmed that claudin-3 loss induces Wnt/Beta-catenin activation, which is further exacerbated by Stat-3-activation and help promote colon cancer.
Among the paradoxical claudin reaction nuclear localization of marker was observed relatively rarely: claudin-3 in 2.5% cases of colon cancer; claudin-4 in 8.5% of colon polyps.
Mislocalization claudin-3 to nucleus in colon cancer and mislocalization claudin-4 to nucleus in adenomas of the colon were detected for the first time.
Our approach aimed at evaluation of a selective and targeted cancer gene therapy of claudin-3- and/or claudin-4- expressing colon carcinoma in vitro and in vivo by using translation optimized CPE expressing vector.
In this study the recombinant CPE and a translation optimized CPE expressing vector (optCPE) was used for targeted gene therapy of claudin-3 and/or -4 overexpressing colon cancer cell lines.
All experiments were performed in the human SW480, SW620, HCT116, CaCo-2 and HT-29 colon cancer and the isogenic Sk-Mel5 and Sk-Mel5 Cldn-3-YFP melanoma cell lines.
Claudin-3 and -4 overexpressing colon carcinoma lines showed high sensitivity towards both recCPE application and optCPE gene transfer.
This novel approach demonstrates that optCPE gene transfer represents a promising and efficient therapeutic option for a targeted suicide gene therapy of claudin-3 and/or claudin-4 overexpressing colon carcinomas, leading to rapid and effective tumor cell killing in vitro and in vivo.
To investigate the expression of claudin-3 in colorectal carcinoma and its association with the occurrence, progression and prognosis of colorectal cancer.
Claudin-3 is over-expressed in colorectal cancer tissues, and its high expression may promote the occurrence and progression of colorectal cancer.
Here, we report that epidermal growth factor (EGF) increases the expression of claudin-3 in human colorectal adenocarcinoma HT-29 cells.
In conclusion, our results show a novel role for claudin-3 overexpression in promoting the malignant potential of colorectal cancer cells, which is potentially regulated by the EGF-activated ERK1/2 and PI3K-Akt pathways.
Patients with essential thrombocythemia (ET) and polycythemia vera (PV), complicated by microvascular ischemic or thrombotic events, have shortened platelet survival, increased beta-thromboglobulin, platelet factor 4, and thrombomodulin levels, and increased urinary thromboxane B2 excretion.
Our results suggest that CEP68 gene variants may play an important role in MNSAID-UA susceptibility and, despite the different regulatory mechanisms involved depending on the specific affected organ, in the development of hypersensitivity reactions to NSAIDs.
Baboon anti-pig antibody (Ab) was measured before CPB, before circulatory arrest, during AbA, at the end of CPB, and daily after HTx.
At 4 dpi a severe fibrinosuppurative bronchopneumonia had developed.
However, the SrGAP3-deficient mice showed little to no interest in burying marbles; a behavior that is seen in some animal models related to autism, supporting the view that SrGAP3 plays a role in neurodevelopmental disorders.
BA synthesis was directly quantified by measuring serum concentrations of 7alpha-hydroxycholest-4-en-3-one (C4), along with serum FGF19 and other parameters, in 44 patients with primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) and 10 healthy subjects.
Whether fibroblast growth factor 19 (FGF19) or farnesoid X receptor (FXR) dependent signaling are involved in the regulation of BA homeostasis in primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) remains unknown.
Our results provide further insight into the specific relationship between histone H4 modification and gene expression during spermatogenesis, which could help to elucidate the epigenetic disorders underlying male infertility.
Previous studies have resulted in the isolation of the human HSST gene from within the Treacher Collins syndrome locus (TCOF1) critical region on 5q.
As a result of these studies, mutations within the coding sequence and adjacent splice junctions of HSST can be excluded from a causative role in the pathogenesis of Treacher Collins syndrome.
In univariate analyses, diabetes mellitus, chronic kidney disease, ischemic etiology of LBBB, dilated left atrium, reduced LVEF, dilated left ventricle, and impaired LV global strain (GLS &gt; -12.2%, global circumferential strain &gt; -11.8%, and twist &lt; 6.5) showed associations with the composite end point.
Individuals with T1D had increased systolic torsion (P = 0.035), systolic torsion rate (P = 0.032), peak Ecl (P = 0.001), and rates of change of systolic (P = 0.007) and diastolic (P = 0.007) Ecl Individuals with T1D, with normal structure, LVEF, and strain, have increased extracellular volume and increased native T1 values with associated augmented torsion and Ecl These measures may be useful in detecting the early stages of diabetic cardiomyopathy and warrant larger prospective studies.NEW &amp; NOTEWORTHY Individuals with type 1 diabetes, with normal left ventricular structure and function (ejection fraction and strain), have signs of interstitial fibrosis, measured with MRI as increased extracellular volume fraction and increased native myocardial T1, which significantly correlated with a number of measures of augmented left ventricular twist function.
In this study, we show that hyperinsulinemia in the Rag/MKR mice increases the expression of mesenchymal transcription factors, TWIST1 and ZEB1, and increases the expression of the angiogenesis marker, vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGFA).
Aortic PWV correlated crudely with age (p &lt; 0.001), the presence of diabetes (p &lt; 0.001), hypertension (p &lt; 0.001), eGFR (p &lt; 0.001), LVMI (p = 0.01), e/e' (p &lt; 0.001) and LV twist (p = 0.003).
There is limited information regarding the role of left ventricular (LV) twist and the effect of exercise in type 2 diabetes (T2D).
These results demonstrated that quercetin ameliorates the EMT of HK-2 and NRK-52E cells induced by high glucose and renal fibrosis induced by diabetes, and these effects have been associated with the inhibition of the two transcriptional factors (snail and twist) and the activation of mTORC1/p70S6K.
Activin Receptor-Like Kinase 5 (ALK-5) is related to some types of cancer, such as breast, lung and pancreas.
Overall, we discussed about the main interactions between ALK-5 and six inhibitors that may be used as starting point for designing of new molecules to the cancer treatment.
In summary, the results suggest that eupatolide suppresses the migration and invasion of breast cancer cells by blocking the canonical ALK5-SMAD3 signaling pathway and the non-canonical ERK and AKT signaling pathways.
Expression of a mutant TBetaRI that signals but does not interact with Smad7 prevented the CerS4-mediated inhibition of migration in various cancer cells.
TBetaRI-Smo cross-talk at the cilia in CerS4-deficient 4T1 mammary cancer cells induced liver metastasis from orthotopic allografts in both wild-type and CerS4-deficient mice, which was prevented by overexpression of Smad7 or knockdown of intraflagellar transport protein 88 (IFT88).
Transforming growth factor type 1 receptor (ALK5) is kinase associated with a wide variety of pathological processes, and inhibition of ALK5 is a good strategy to treat many kinds of cancer and fibrotic diseases.
The high mortality rates observed in patients with invasive aspergillosis caused by azole-resistant A. fumigatus (ARAF) isolates pose serious challenges to the clinical microbiologist for timely identification of resistance and appropriate therapeutic interventions.
MKL/myocardin-like 2 (MKL2) encodes myocardin-related transcription factor B in a megakaryoblastic leukemia gene family, and C11orf95 (chromosome 11 open reading frame 95) is a hypothetical protein.
Serum levels of IL-16, IL-33 and the decoy receptor of IL-33, soluble ST2, are elevated in allergic rhinitis.
Recent studies show that IL-16, soluble ST2 or anti-IL-33 reduce type 2 cytokines (such as IL-5) and eosinophilia in murine models of allergic asthma or allergic rhinitis respectively.
In this study, we studied the release of IL-5, IL-16, IL-33 and soluble ST2 in allergic rhinitis patients after nasal allergen challenge and natural pollen exposure.
The observed upregulation of soluble ST2 and IL-16 after nasal allergen challenge and during peak pollination season suggests potential regulatory roles of these cytokines in the inflammatory reaction in allergic rhinitis.
To detect the expression and distribution of the lung surfactant protein D (surfactant protein D,SP-D ) and IL-16 in nasal mucosa of allergic rhinitis and nasal polyps, and then probe into their significance in the pathology of allergic rhinitis and nasal polyps.
Fifteen cases of allergic rhinitis, fifteen cases of nasal polyps and fifteen cases of inferior turbinate mucosa were studied to detect the expression of SP-D and IL-16 by immunohistochemistry method.
The expression of SP-D and IL-16 in allergic rhinitis and nasal polyps were dramatically higher in controls (P &lt; 0.01).
There was no remarkable difference in the expression of SP-D and IL-16 between allergic rhinitis and nasal polyps (P &gt; 0.05).
IL-16 is an important eosinophil chemokine in the process of allergic rhinitis and nasal polyps,and it can also enhance the local role of eosinophils,thus it can involve in the process of allergic rhinitis and nasal polyps disease.
Though a chemotactin for CD4(+) cells and eosinophils, IL-16 also modulates their production of factors that influence inflammatory lung diseases, e.g., asthma and allergic rhinitis.
Interleukin-16 (IL-16) is a cytokine that induces selective migration of CD4+ cells and participates in inflammatory diseases including allergic rhinitis.
We evaluated the variability of IL-16 and the effects of the antiallergic drugs fexofenadine (40 mg/kg/day) and ramatroban (30 mg/kg/day) on IL-16 in an OVA-sensitized BALB/c murine experimental allergic rhinitis model.
These results suggest that IL-16 was both systemically and locally upregulated in the murine allergic rhinitis model and that IL-16 changed in parallel to allergic state by treatment with the drugs.
The results showed abnormally increased levels of IL-16 (294.4 +/- 15.24 pg/ml), serum eosinophils with absolute count (510.0 +/- 93.57, P&gt;0.05), and total serum IgE (287.9 +/- 61.22 IU/ml) using ELFA in patients of combined asthma and rhinitis, than in each of them alone.
We first examined the IL-16 expression of serum and mucosal tissue in patients with allergic rhinitis.
IL-16 levels were elevated in the serum of patients with allergic rhinitis compared with normal controls.
IL-16 was significantly correlated with eosinophils in the peripheral blood of allergic rhinitis patients.
This IL-16 cytokine may be strongly associated with the developmental mechanism of allergic rhinitis.
Speech fluency was assessed in 35 patients with frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) who presented with progressive non-fluent aphasia (PNFA, n=11), semantic dementia (SemD, n=12), or a social and executive disorder without aphasia (SOC/EXEC, n=12).
Two subtypes commonly present with a language disorder: semantic dementia (SemD) and progressive nonfluent aphasia (PNFA).
Expression of several genes associated with schizophrenia or autism including Sema3a, Trfr2 and Vldlr were found to be altered as were protein levels of Foxp2.
We classified 67 patients with PPA into three clinical variants: semantic dementia (SEMD), progressive nonfluent aphasia (PNFA), and logopenic progressive aphasia (LPA), and we compared the severity of behavioral dysfunction, as measured by the Neuropsychiatric Inventory, in these groups and patients with frontotemporal dementia (FTD) and Alzheimer disease (AD).
The authors asked patients with progressive nonfluent aphasia (PNFA), patients with semantic dementia (SemD), and nonaphasic patients with a disorder of social comportment and executive functioning (SOC/EXEC) to narrate the story of a wordless children's picture book.
Each sequence is manually annotated with primary function, subfunction and subcellular location, and extensively annotated in an automated process with data extracted from external databases, including gene information from LocusLink and Ensembl; disease information from OMIM; protein-protein interaction data from MINT and DIP; functional domain information from Pfam; protein fingerprints from PRINTS; protein family and family-specific signatures from InterPro; structure data from PDB; mutation data from PMD; BLAST homology data from NCBI NR; and proteins found to be related based on LocusLink and SWISS-PROT references and sequence and taxonomy data.
High fat diet-induced activation of insulin receptor substrate 1/Forkhead box protein O1 (IRS1/FOXO1), Janus kinase 2 gene/signal transducer and activator of transcription (JAK2/STAT3) and Protein Kinase B/Glycogen synthase kinase 3 beta (AKT/GSK3Beta) pathways in liver was inhibited by actein, a potential mechanism by which hyperinsulinemia, hyperleptindemia and dyslipidemia were attenuated.
An increase in the ratio of Abeta(WT)/Abeta(MUT(Arctic)), therefore, may result in the accumulation of potential neurotoxic protofibrils and acceleration of disease progression in familial Alzheimer's disease mutation carriers.
To gain insight into the pathogenesis of these tumors we have analyzed the immunophenotype (ARID1A, MLH1, PMS2, MSH2, MSH6, p53, b-catenin, SMARCB1, synaptophysin, chromogranin A, and CD56) and mutational status (PTEN, KRAS, PIK3CA, TP53 and POLE) of 4 dedifferentiated endometrial carcinomas with strong and diffuse neuroendocrine expression.
In gynecological cancer, ARID1A mutations have been identified in 46-57% of clear cell carcinoma and 30% of endometrioid carcinoma.
We recently identified 3 mutually exclusive mechanisms of switch/sucrose nonfermentable (SWI/SNF) complex inactivation (BRG1 inactivation, INI1 inactivation or ARID1A/ARID1B co-inactivation) that are associated with histologic dedifferentiation in the majority of dedifferentiated endometrial carcinoma.
The tumor suppressor gene, AT Rich Interactive Domain 1A (ARID1A) mutation has been reported in a variety of cancers, especially the endometrium-related gynecological cancers, including the ovarian clear cell carcinoma, ovarian endometrioid carcinoma, and uterine endometrioid carcinoma.
The current study aimed to evaluate serum levels of MFAP4 in patients with pulmonary fibrosis in order to test its potential as biomarker in clinical practice.
A further aim was to determine whether MFAP4 deficiency in mice affects the formation of pulmonary fibrosis in the bleomycin model of lung fibrosis.
MFAP4 levels were increased in BAL of bleomycin treated mice with pulmonary fibrosis.
MFAP4 is not elevated in sera of patients with pulmonary fibrosis or bleomycin treated mice with pulmonary fibrosis.
The aim of this study was to test the hypothesis that plasma MFAP4 (pMFAP4) reflects clinical outcomes in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
Multiple linear regressions showed positive associations between pMFAP4 and the Global initiative for Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) grade (p = 0.01), modified Medical Research Council score (p &lt; 0.0001) and BODE index (p = 0.04).
For essential thrombocythemia, reported risk factors for leukemic transformation include advanced age, extreme thrombocytosis, anemia, leukocytosis, and sequence variants/mutations involving TP53 and EZH2 (for expansion of gene symbols, see www.genenames.org); for polycythemia vera, advanced age, leukocytosis, abnormal karyotype, mutations involving SRSF2 and IDH2, and treatment with pipobroman, chlorambucil, or P32; and for PMF, increased blast percentage, thrombocytopenia, abnormal karyotype, triple-negative driver mutational status, and sequence variants/mutations involving SRSF2, RUNX1, CEBPA, and SH2B3.
In the present case, i(17q)/-17, der(12p), del(5q26), del(7q36), and del(20q11) indicate possible alterations in TP53, ETV6, IDH2, EZH2, and SRSF2 genes, which are responsible for pathomechanism, genetic instability, clonal evolution, and advancement of disease condition.
Accumulating evidence indicates that enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) promotes the metastatic ability of solid tumors, but the role of EZH2 in extramedullary infiltration (EMI) in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) has not been thoroughly explored.
We found that the messenger RNA (mRNA) and protein expression levels of EZH2 in AML patients were both significantly higher than in idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) patients.
Histopathological examination (HPE) of excised gland showed multiple Hurthle cell adenomas in both lobes of thyroid along with foci of papillary thyroid carcinoma which on immunohistochemistry were thyroglobulin positive and PSA negative.
Univariate analysis showed that male gender, thyroglobulin concentrations &gt;=300 ng/ml and tumor diameter &gt;30 mm were significantly more frequent in patients with oxyphile carcinoma compared to patients with oxyphile adenoma, while coexisting Hashimoto thyreoiditis and positive AntiTPO antibodies appeared significantly less frequent in the carcinoma group.
The histologic appearance together with the immune profile was diagnostic of WCCA, with diffuse positivity for GATA3, focal weak positivity for parathyroid hormone, and negativity for PAX8, thyroglobulin, TTF1, synaptophysin, chromogranin, and S100p.
After immunohistochemical characterization using a panel of chromogranin A, thyroglobulin, and calcitonin, 7 of the former thyroid neoplasms were diagnosed as thyroid adenomas, 1 was diagnosed as a thyroid carcinoma, and 4 were diagnosed as parathyroid adenomas.
The findings obtained using these cell lines derived from ovarian clear cell adenocarcinoma indicate that integrin alpha3 may associated with the acquisition of malignant potential by clear cell adenocarcinoma.
No entanto, a existencia de uma patologia cronica pode determinar um elevado nivel de cuidados preventivos gerais, inclusivamente resultando numa melhoria global do seu nivel de saude oral, o que podera justificar os resultados obtidos.Conclusao: A presenca de diabetes mellitus tipo 1 em doentes tratados com bomba de insulina nao esta associada a um aumento da prevalencia de lesoes de carie dentaria.
Few of the substrates of Tankyrases are Telomeric Repeat binding Factor protein (TRF1), Axis Inhibitory protein (AXIN 1&amp;amp;2), Insulin Responsive Amino Peptidase (IRAP), Nuclear Mitotic Apparatus protein (NuMa), that become aberrantly active due to the apparent overexpression of the enzyme during hyper proliferative disease conditions like cancer, fibrosis and metabolic disorders like diabetes.
O objetivo deste estudo foi avaliar a utilidade deste exame numa populacao de criancas e adolescentes obesos, maioritariamente de etnia caucasiana.Material e Metodos: Foram recrutados 226 doentes [indice de massa corporal z-score 3,35 A+/- 0,59, 90% caucasianos, 55% do sexo feminino, idade mediana de 12,3 (ambito: 8,9 a 17,6) anos] referenciados a consulta de obesidade pediatrica de um hospital terciario, com criterios para rastreio de diabetes mellitus tipo 2.
Finally, we speculate on the potential benefits of the inhibition of Sin3B-containing complexes for the treatment of cancer.
Expert opinion: Further identification and characterization of specific Sin3B-containing complexes provide a unique opportunity to prevent the pro-tumorigenic effects of the senescence-associated secretory phenotype, and to abrogate cancer stem cell quiescence and the associated resistance to therapy.
SIN3B has been implicated in the initiation of senescence in vitro Here we show that in a mouse model of prostate cancer, SIN3B provides a barrier to malignant progression.
SIN3B was required for PTEN-induced cellular senescence and prevented progression to invasive prostate adenocarcinoma.
Furthermore, SIN3B was downregulated in human prostate adenocarcinoma correlating with upregulation of its target genes.
Our results suggest a tumor suppressor function for SIN3B that limits prostate adenocarcinoma progression, with potential implications for the use of SIN3B and its target genes as candidate diagnostic markers to distinguish indolent from aggressive disease.
However, specific roles for SIN3A and SIN3B in breast cancer progression have not been characterized.
Additionally, we analyzed microarray data sets to identify correlations of SIN3A and SIN3B expression with survival in patients with breast cancer.
These data sets indicated that high mRNA expression of SIN3A as well as low mRNA expression of SIN3B correlates with longer relapse free survival specifically in patients with triple negative breast cancer which corresponds with our in vitro and in vivo data.
These results demonstrate key functional differences between SIN3 paralogs in regulating the process of breast cancer metastasis and suggest metastasis suppressive roles of SIN3A and metastasis promoting roles of SIN3B.
Finally, by immunohistochemical staining of primary breast tissue microarrays we find that EMSY/KDM5A/SIN3B complex subunits are frequently overexpressed in primary breast cancer cases in a correlative manner.
Here, using a mouse model of pancreatic cancer, we have demonstrated that SIN3B is required for activated KRAS-induced senescence in vivo.
Furthermore, evaluation of human pancreatic tissue and cancer cells revealed that Sin3B was decreased in control and PDAC samples, compared with samples from patients with pancreatic inflammation.
Among proteins in the c-Myc/Max/Mad/Sin3 regulatory complex, Mad4 and Sin3B are routinely detected in human glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) cell lines.
In response to gamma radiation, the expression of Sin3B and Mad4 in GBM cells was upregulated in parallel over time, suggesting that Sin3B may play a role in the regulation of Mad4 stability.
Using the Drosophila heart as a platform for identifying novel gene interactions leading to heart disease, we found that the Rho-GTPase Cdc42 cooperates with the cardiac transcription factor Tinman/Nkx2-5.
What is more important is that the depressed-expression of Cav1.3 paralleled with enhanced-expression of Snapin was documented in atrial samples from atrial fibrillation (AF) patients.
Furthermore, inactivation of Cav1.3 channels promotes also atrial fibrillation and flutter in knockout mice suggesting that these channels can play a role in stabilizing atrial rhythm.
The significance of the tissue-specific expression of the channel is underpinned by our previous demonstration of atrial fibrillation in a Cav1.3 null mutant mouse model.
The novel Cav1.3 (Alfa1D) L-type Ca^2+ channel plays a significant role in sinoatrial (SA) and atrioventricular (AV) nodes function and in atrial fibrillation.
Interestingly, oncogenic CARD11 variants associated with diffuse large B cell lymphoma spontaneously induce Lin(Ub)n-Bcl10 production to extents that correlate with their abilities to activate NF-KB and with their enhanced abilities to bind HOIP and Bcl10.
Our previous studies showed important regulatory functions of RNF31 in controlling important oncogenic pathways in breast cancer, such as ERAlfa and p53.
This review highlights recent discoveries on RNF31 functions in nuclear factor modifications, breast cancer progression and possible therapeutic inhibitors targeting RNF31.
The atypical E3 ubiquitin ligase RNF31 is highly expressed in human breast cancer, the most frequent neoplastic lethality among women.
Here, RNF31 depletion in breast cancer cells in combination with global gene expression profiling revealed p53 (TP53) signaling as a potential RNF31 target.
Interestingly, RNF31 decreased p53 stability, whereas depletion of RNF31 in breast cancer cells caused cell cycle arrest and cisplatin-induced apoptosis in a p53-dependent manner.
Together, our findings suggest RNF31 as a potential therapeutic target to restore p53 function in breast cancer.
By examining the kinetics of pathway activation in TRAIL-sensitive lymphoma cells wild-type or deficient for RIP1, TRAF2, cIAP1/2 or HOIP, we report here that TRAIL induces two phases of JNK and NF-KB activation.
Literature search included the terms adrenergic, noradrenergic, reuptake, inhibitors, analgesia, NET, norepinephrine transporter, and pain using Medline, Google scholar, Web of Knowledge, www.clinicaltrials.gov, and Pharmaprojects (Informa UK Ltd. 2012).
Norepinephrine transporter blockade seems to be essential for analgesia, but optimal concentrations are unknown.
The third type is the secondary PHA1, which is strongly associated with urinary tract infections and/or urinary tract malformations.
To identify mutation in SCNN1B and SCNN1G genes in an adolescent with suspicious Liddle syndrome and his family members and to explore the screening target subjects of Liddle syndrome.
Genetic analysis of the C-terminus of SCNN1B and SCNN1G genes was conducted in an adolescent, with treatment-resistant hypertension and hypokalemia, who was suspected of having Liddle syndrome, and his family members.
In adulthood, an induced nephron-specific deficiency of AlfaENaC (Scnn1a) resulted in pseudohypoaldosteronism type 1 (PHA-1) with sodium loss, hyperkalemia, and metabolic acidosis that is rescued through high-sodium/low-potassium (HNa+/LK+) diet.
Liddle syndrome is an autosomal dominant genetic condition that causes hypertension and hypokalemia due to a gain-of-function mutation in the SCNN1B or SCNN1G genes which code for the epithelial sodium channel in the kidney.
Loss-of-function mutations of the MR are responsible for renal pseudohypoaldosteronism type 1 (PHA1), a rare disease of mineralocorticoid resistance presenting in the newborn with weight loss, failure to thrive, vomiting and dehydration, associated with hyperkalemia and metabolic acidosis, despite extremely elevated levels of plasma renin and aldosterone.
In the presence of pyelonephritis, the same biochemical picture can occur with transient type 1 pseudohypoaldosteronism (PHA-1) also termed type 4 renal tubular acidosis.
Pseudohypoaldosteronism type 1 (PHA1) is a rare genetic disease characterized by resistance to aldosterone, and the renal form of PHA1 is associated with heterozygous inactivating mutations in NR3C2, which encodes mineralocorticoid receptor (MR).
Recent work has identified cancer-associated U2AF35 missense mutations in two zinc-finger (ZnF) domains, but little is known about Q157R/P substitutions within the second ZnF.
Zinc finger (ZNF) proteins, a diverse family of proteins, have multiple biological functions in cancer.
However, the function and underlying mechanisms of ZNF185 in the tumorigenesis of lung adenocarcinoma (LAC) remain unclear.
We found that the protein expression of ZNF185 was significantly downregulated in LAC tissues compared with the adjacent non-cancerous tissues (ANCT) (37.10% vs 58.06%, P=0.015), and was negatively correlated with the lymph node metastasis of the LAC patients (P=0.005).
In view of the exploitation of tetraspanins by organisms for survival, these proteins could be targeted using specific antibodies, recombinant large extracellular loop (LEL) domains, small-molecule mimetics and siRNAs as potential novel and efficacious putative targets to combat African trypanosomiasis by killing the tsetse fly vector.
Infection of hepatocytic cells by two major pathogens, the hepatitis C virus and the malaria parasite, also requires the tetraspanin CD81.
Our results unravel a functional link between CD81 and cholesterol during infection by malaria parasites, and illustrate that tetraspanin microdomains constitute a novel type of membrane microdomains that could be used by pathogens for infection.
The CXCL11 gene may also play a role in BK polyomavirus-associated nephropathy.
Our aim was to compare expression levels of CXCL11 in BK polyomavirus-infected versus noninfected kidney transplant patients with nephropathy and healthy controls.
Taken together, the results indicated that sorafenib had protective effects against renal fibrosis; its mechanism of action was associated with inhibition of macrophage infiltration via the CXCR3/CXCL11 pathway.
Urinary mRNA levels of CXCL10 and CXCL11 are decreased, and those of collagen I A1 chain and fibronectin are increased in diabetic nephropathy.
For this purpose, serum concentration of interleukin 2 (IL2), interleukin 10 (IL10), interferon-gamma (IFNG), Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) and Toll-like receptor 9 (TLR9) were measured in blood samples obtained from F(2) piglets (n = 334) of a Duroc x Pietrain resource population (DUPI) after Mycoplasma hypopneumoniae (Mh), tetanus toxoid (TT) and Porcine Reproductive and Respiratory Syndrome Virus (PRRSV) vaccination at 6, 9 and 15 weeks of age.
Not only TLR-2 gene polymorphisms but also immunoglobulins (IgG, IgM, IgA), IgG subsets (G1, G2, G3), and specific antibody levels (anti-tetanus and anti-hemophilus influenza) were determined to exclude humoral immunodeficiencies.
While glutamate is not a known OAT4 or OATP2B1 substrate, we propose that its high intracellular concentration has the potential to drive accumulation of substrates from the fetal circulation.
Cycling of glutamate across the placenta involving efflux via OAT4 and OATP2B1 and subsequent reuptake will drive placental uptake of organic anions from the fetal circulation.
Efflux transport of olmesartan via OAT4 from syncytiotrophoblasts to the fetal circulation might be facilitated in the presence of an inwardly directed physiological chloride gradient and extracellular DHEAS.
This is probably the first case report of cobalamin intracellular metabolism defect (CblC/CblD/CblF/CblJ or ABCD4) presenting as diabetic ketoacidosis.
Moderate to severe sensorineural hearing loss and progressive RP characterizes Usher syndrome type IIa (USH2A), which maps to the long arm of chromosome 1q41.
Usher syndrome type IIa (OMIM 276901), an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by moderate to severe sensorineural hearing loss and progressive retinitis pigmentosa, maps to the long arm of human chromosome 1q41 between markers AFM268ZD1 and AFM144XF2.
Moderate to severe non-progressive high frequency hearing loss with RP and normal vestibular function describes Usher syndrome type IIa, which has been localized to 1q41.
As one subtype of the class IIa HDACs, HDAC9 is capable to repress/de-repress their target genes in tumor, inflammation, atherosclerosis and metabolic diseases.
Taken together, our data suggest that SNP rs2107595 may contribute to coronary atherosclerosis and CAD risk through a possible mechanism of regulating HDAC9 expression and gene-environment interactions.
These results suggest that HDAC9 may participate in ox-LDL-induced endothelial damage and inflammation during atherosclerosis development.
Our results also supported robust associations with ischaemic stroke for four other loci that have been reported in previous studies, including PITX2 (first stage OR 1*39, 1*29-1*49, p=3*26 x 10-19; joint OR 1*37, 1*30-1*45, p=2*79 x 10-32) and ZFHX3 (first stage OR 1*19, 1*11-1*27, p=2*93 x 10-7; joint OR 1*17, 1*11-1*23, p=2*29 x 10-10) for cardioembolic stroke, and HDAC9 (first stage OR 1*29, 1*18-1*42, p=3*50 x 10-8; joint OR 1*24, 1*15-1*33, p=4*52 x 10-9) for large artery atherosclerosis stroke.
In this study, we investigated the candidacy and directionality of HDAC9 in atherosclerosis and analyzed associations between risk alleles at 7p21.1 and plaque characteristics.
Targeted inhibition of HDAC9 might be a viable strategy to prevent atherosclerosis.
The ability of a pulsed oxygen delivery system (Puritan-Bennett Companion Oxygen Saver (COS-5) to track respiratory rate during exercise and the oxygenation achieved during the exercise while oxygen was being delivered by this system was compared to that attained while oxygen was delivered continuously in six patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and six patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF).
Peripheral blood monocyte surface marker (CD14, CD16, CD163, CSF1R, CCR2, CCR4, CCR5, CXCR3, CXCR4, CX3CR1, HLA-DR, CD62L, SIGLEC-1) expression and capacity for phagocytosis, oxidative burst and LPS-stimulated TNF production were assessed in patients with hepatitis C (HCV) (n = 39) or non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) (n = 34) (classified as non-advanced disease, compensated cirrhosis and decompensated cirrhosis) and healthy controls (n = 11) by flow cytometry.
Soluble CD163 (sCD163), a marker of Kupffer cell activation detectable in serum, correlates with inflammation and fibrosis in chronic viral hepatitis, but its role in nonalcoholic fatty liver disease is unknown.
We hypothesized that sCD163 would correlate with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease activity and fibrosis.
dermatoses presenting with erythematous-desquamative patches/plaques (plaque psoriasis, eczematous dermatitis, pityriasis rosea, mycosis fungoides and subacute cutaneous lupus erythematosus), papulosquamous/papulokeratotic dermatoses (lichen planus, pityriasis rosea, papulosquamous sarcoidosis, guttate psoriasis, pityriasis lichenoides chronica, classical pityriasis rubra pilaris, porokeratosis, lymphomatoid papulosis, papulosquamous chronic GVHD, parakeratosis variegata, Grover disease, Darier disease and BRAF-inhibitor-induced acantholytic dyskeratosis), facial inflammatory skin diseases (rosacea, seborrheic dermatitis, discoid lupus erythematosus, sarcoidosis, cutaneous leishmaniasis, lupus vulgaris, granuloma faciale and demodicidosis), acquired keratodermas (chronic hand eczema, palmar psoriasis, keratoderma due to mycosis fungoides, keratoderma resulting from pityriasis rubra pilaris, tinea manuum, palmar lichen planus and aquagenic palmar keratoderma), sclero-atrophic dermatoses (necrobiosis lipoidica, morphea and cutaneous lichen sclerosus), hypopigmented macular diseases (extragenital guttate lichen sclerosus, achromic pityriasis versicolor, guttate vitiligo, idiopathic guttate hypomelanosis, progressive macular hypomelanosis and postinflammatory hypopigmentations), hyperpigmented maculopapular diseases (pityriasis versicolor, lichen planus pigmentosus, Gougerot-Carteaud syndrome, Dowling-Degos disease, erythema ab igne, macular amyloidosis, lichen amyloidosus, friction melanosis, terra firma-forme dermatosis, urticaria pigmentosa and telangiectasia macularis eruptiva perstans), itchy papulonodular dermatoses (hypertrophic lichen planus, prurigo nodularis, nodular scabies and acquired perforating dermatosis), erythrodermas (due to psoriasis, atopic dermatitis, mycosis fungoides, pityriasis rubra pilaris and scabies), noninfectious balanitis (Zoon's plasma cell balanitis, psoriatic balanitis, seborrheic dermatitis and non-specific balanitis) and erythroplasia of Queyrat, inflammatory cicatricial alopecias (scalp discoid lupus erythematosus, lichen planopilaris, frontal fibrosing alopecia and folliculitis decalvans), nonscarring alopecias (alopecia areata, trichotillomania, androgenetic alopecia and telogen effluvium) and scaling disorders of the scalp (tinea capitis, scalp psoriasis, seborrheic dermatitis and pityriasis amiantacea).
Kaposi varicelliform eruption or eczema herpeticum is well known to be associated with several chronic dermatoses, including atopic dermatitis, foliaceus pemphigus, seborrheic dermatitis, Darier disease, and congenital ichthyosiform erythroderma.
MCI-186, a dose that prevents ischemic brain edema, had no significant effect on brain concentrations of dopamine, norepinephrine, 5-hydroxytryptamine, or their metabolites.
Pretreatments with dexamethasone, parachlorophenylalanine (an inhibitor of 5-hydroxytryptamine synthesis), mepyramine and metiamide (H1 and H2 histamine receptor antagonists) or aminophylline did not influence significantly the development of brain edema evaluated 24 h after embolization.
To study the effect of B lymphocyte-induced mature protein-1(Blimp1) expression in bone marrow mononuclear cells on the prognosis of patients with multiple myeloma.
Here we further dissect the anti-myeloma mechanisms mediated by EZH2 inhibition and show that pharmacological inhibition of EZH2 reduces the expression of MM-associated oncogenes; IRF-4, XBP-1, PRDM1/BLIMP-1 and c-MYC.
To investigate the expression level of B lymphocyte-induced maturation protein-1(Blimp-1) mRNA in bone marrow mononuclear cells(BMMNC) of multiple myeloma(MM) patients and its clinical significance.
Meanwhile, plasma could promote myeloma differentiation by up-regulating Blimp-1 and XBP-1 expression.
However, how Blimp-1 ensures the survival of plasma cell malignancy, multiple myeloma (MM), has remained elusive.
The finding that Blimp-1/PRDM1 enhances transcription of CS1 gene in multiple myeloma cells may help in developing novel strategies for therapeutic intervention in multiple myeloma.
Lhx9 is an LIM (named for the first three proteins in which the domain was found, Lin-11, Isl1 and Mec-3) homeodomain protein involved in development and differentiation of the gonad.
We report that CCRL2-deficient mice have a defect in neutrophil recruitment and are protected in 2 models of inflammatory arthritis.
The concurrence of PJS and feminizing SCTs of the testes is an increasingly recognized cause of prepubertal gynecomastia.
Most IgAD and CVID patients in our clinic population in the Southeastern United States have inherited part or all of two extended MHC haplotypes, referred to as haplotype 1 (HLA-DQB1 0201, HLA-DR3, C4B-Sf, C4A-0, G1-15, Bf-0.4, C2-a, HSP-7.5, TNF alpha-5, HLA-B8, HLA-A1) and haplotype 2 (HLA-DQB1 0201, HLA-DR-7, C4B-S, C4A-L, G11-4.5, Bf-0.6, C2-b, HSP-9, TNF alpha-9, HLA-B44, HLA-A29).
In search of a genetic linkage between the two immunodeficiencies, we examined the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class III genes encoding complement components C2, C4A, and C4B and steroid 21-hydroxylase in addition to the HLA serotypes in individuals with either common variable immunodeficiency or IgA deficiency.
Twelve of 19 patients with common variable immunodeficiency (63%, P less than 0.001) and 9 of 16 patients with IgA deficiency (56%, P less than 0.01) had rare C2 alleles and/or C4A and 21-hydroxylase A deletions, whereas these gene features were seen in only 5 of 34 healthy individuals (15%) in the control group.
Totally implantable venous access port (TIVAP)-related infections (RIs) remain a serious health problem in cancer patients receiving an intravenous (i.v.)
Furthermore, we provided a RIs-based algorithm for biomarker discovery and validation to screen for diseases such as cancer.
Liver sections from patients with biliary atresia were evaluated to detect antigen for the BECs marker 4 and cytokeratin-7 (CK-7), proteins (fibroblast-specific protein 1, also known S100A4; the collagen chaperone heat shock protein 47, HSP47) characteristically expressed by cells undergoing EMT, as well as myofibroblasts marker a-smooth muscle actin (a-SMA).
However, BECs from biliary atresia resulted in increased expression of a-SMA, S100A4, with concurrent transition to a fibroblast-like morphology and decreased expression of AK-7.
Consequently, there has been considerable interest in the pharmaceutical industry to develop selective TPL-2 inhibitors as drugs for the treatment of TNF-dependent inflammatory diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis and inflammatory bowel disease.
Thus, pharmacologic inhibition of Tpl2 should be a valid approach to therapeutic intervention in the pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis and other inflammatory diseases in humans.
Taken together, our results show that inhibition of Tpl2 in primary human cell types can decrease the production of TNFalpha and other pro-inflammatory mediators during inflammatory events, and they further support the notion that Tpl2 is an appropriate therapeutic target for rheumatoid arthritis and other human inflammatory diseases.
Recent studies using Tpl2 knockout mice have indicated an important role for Tpl2 in the lipopolysaccharide (LPS) induced production of tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha) and other proinflammatory cytokines involved in diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis.
In all, 78.08% had stage 1 HTN while 22% had stage 2 HTN.
Moreover, ba-PWV showed a significant increase with increasing plasma tHcy level in subjects with both high normal BP and grade 1 HTN (p &lt; 0.05).
Compared with optimal BP stage, ba-PWV was significantly associated with high normal BP stage (Beta = 193, p &lt; 0.001) and grade 1 HTN (Beta = 413, p &lt; 0.001).There was a statistical interaction effect between high normal BP stage and optimal BP stage (p = 0.045).
The similar result was found between subjects with optimal BP and those with grade 1 HTN (p = 0.037).
In conclusion, tHcy was independently correlated with ba-PWV in subjects with high normal BP and grade 1 HTN.
High normal BP and grade 1 HTN may worsen the impact of tHcy on arterial stiffness in a Chinese rural community population.
NpeAMeToM npoAonXahweNcR ANcKyccNN RBnReTcR npoBeAeHNe EKcTpeHHblx EHAapTepEKToMNN N TpoMbNHTNMEKToMNN y namyNeHToB c NHcynbToM B xoAy, crescendo TNA, ocTpoN oKKnh3NeN BHyTpeHHeN coHHoN apTepNN.
The upper bound of a 95% confidence interval for the difference in prevalence of Stage 1 and 2 HTN between study arms indicates that discontinuation of study medication is unlikely to be associated with an increase in Stage 1 HTN of &gt;4.8 percentage points and in Stage 2 HTN of no &gt;5.8 percentage points.
Target genes (e.g., cyclin-dependent kinase 6) of hsa-miR-942-5p were mainly enriched in cancer-related pathways, whereas target genes (e.g., CRK-Like Proto-Oncogene, Adaptor Protein) of hsa-miR-940 were enriched in the ErbB signaling pathway.
Herein, we demonstrated that hypoxia induces the high expression of microRNA-940 (miR-940) in exosomes derived from epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC).
Results: Expressions of hsa-mir-1180, hsa-mir-149, hsa-mir-744 and hsa-mir-940 were all up regulated in high invasion capable cell lines (SNU423, SNU449) and vascular invasion patients with hepatocellular carcinoma (logFC&gt;1, P&lt;0.05).
Results from the Survival analysis showed that hsa-mir-1180 (HR=1.623, 95% CI: 1.114-2.365, P=0.012), hsa-mir-149 (HR=2.400, 95% CI: 1.639-3.514) and hsa-mir-940 (HR=1.704, 95%CI: 1.188-2.443, P=0.004) were independent risk factors on the prognosis of patients with hepatocellular carcinoma (P&lt;0.05).
Conclusion: With TCGA and GEO data mining, we found that hsa-mir-1180, hsa-mir-149, hsa-mir-744 and hsa-mir-940 were all highly related to the prognosis of hepatocellular carcinoma, that enabled it to be used to further study the biomarkers related to the prognosis of hepatocellular carcinoma.
#目#的#： #通#过#对GEO (Gene Expression Omnibus) #与TCGA (The Cancer Genome Atlas) #数#据#库#分#析, #挖#掘#肝#癌#血#管#侵#袭#相#关#的microRNA, #并#分#析#其#预#后#和#可#能#机#制#。 #方#法#： #利#用GEO#数#据#库#获#得#肝#癌#血#管#侵#袭microRNA#芯#片#数#据 (GSE67140) , #对5#种#侵#袭#能#力#不#同#的#细#胞#系 (SNU423#、SNU449#、HepG2#、Hep3B#、SNU398) #表#达#谱#进#行#差#异#分#析, #并#在81#份#血#管#侵#袭#阳#性#组#织#样#本#与91#份#血#管#侵#袭#阴#性#组#织#样#本#中#验#证#差#异#分#析#结#果#。#结#合TCGA#数#据#库#中362#例#肝#癌#病#例#数#据#分#析#其#预#后, #并#对microRNA#所#调#控#的#基#因#进#行GO#与KEGG#分#析#。 #结#果#： hsa-mir-1180#、hsa-mir-149#、hsa-mir-744#、hsa-mir-940#在#侵#袭#能#力#强#的#肝#癌#细#胞#和#有#血#管#侵#袭#的#肝#癌#组#织#中#表#达#上#调 (logFC&gt;1, P&lt;0.05) #。#生#存#分#析#显#示, hsa-mir-1180 (HR=1.623, 95%CI#：1.114~2.365, P=0.012) #、hsa-mir-149 (HR=2.400, 95% CI#：1.639~3.514, P&lt;0.001) #、hsa-mir-744 (HR=1.679, 95%CI#：1.161~2.427, P=0.006) #、hsa-mir-940 (HR=1.704, 95%CI#：1.188~2.443, P=0.004) #是#肝#癌#病#例#预#后#独#立#危#险#因#素, #高#表#达#与#患#者#生#存#期#缩#短#显#著#相#关 (P&lt;0.05) #。GO#与KEGG#分#析#其#机#制#可#能#与#免#疫#反#应#、#细#胞#黏#附#、#紧#密#连#接#等#信#号#通#路#有#关#。 #结#论#： #通#过#对TCGA#与GEO#数#据#库#的#挖#掘, #初#步#发#现hsa-mir-1180#、hsa-mir-149#、hsa-mir-744#、hsa-mir-940#对#肝#癌#的#预#后#有#影#响, #可#作#为#肝#癌#预#后#的#生#物#标#志#物#。.
The high expression of miR-940 is associated with better survival in patients with ovarian serous cystadenocarcinoma.
In our study, real-time (RT) quantitative PCR indicated that miR-940 levels were upregulated in human cervical cancer tissue samples and cell lines.
Ectopic miR-940 accelerated cervical cancer cell growth, proliferation and cell cycle arrest in vitro as well as tumor formation in vivo.
p27 and PTEN were evidenced as direct targets for miR-940 and inhibition of p27 and PTEN recovered the suppressive function of miR-940-silenced cell towards to proliferation and tumorigenicity in cervical cancer cells.
In addition, miR-940 expression was inversely associated with p27 and PTEN expression levels and actively with cyclin D1 in cervical cancer specimens.
The results from our study demonstrated that miR-940 regulated p27 and PTEN post-transcriptionally and might play a significant role in cervical cancer development and progression.
Thus, miR-940 might provide a potential value as therapeutic target for cervical cancer treatment in future.
We aimed to explore the roles and regulatory mechanism of microRNA-940 (miR-940) in bladder cancer development.
The expressions of miR-940 in bladder cancer tissues and cells were measured.
miR-940 was up-regulated in bladder cancer tissues and cells.
Overexpression of miR-940 significantly increased bladder cancer cell proliferation, promoted migration and invasion, and inhibited cell apoptosis.
INPP4A and GSK3Beta were the direct targets of miR-940, and knockdown of INPP4A or GSK3Beta significantly increased cancer cell proliferation, migration and invasion, and inhibited cell apoptosis.
Our results indicate that overexpression of miR-940 may promote bladder cancer cell proliferation, migration and invasion, and inhibited cell apoptosis via targeting INPP4A or GSK3Beta and activating Wnt/Beta-catenin pathway.
Expressions of miR-940, miR-15a, miR-16 and IL-23 in PTC tissues might be useful biomarkers and promising targets in the diagnosis of papillary thyroid carcinoma.
This study investigated the pivotal role of miR-940 in the progression of ovarian cancer and to reveal the possible molecular mechanism of its action.
Ovarian cancer OVCAR3 cells were transfected with the miR-940 vector, miR-940 inhibitor, and/or small interfering RNA (siRNA) targeting PKC-Delta (si-PKC-Delta), respectively.
Taken together, the results of our study suggest that upregulation of miR-940 may function as a suppressor in the progression of ovarian cancer by inhibiting cell proliferation and inducing apoptosis by targeting PKC-Delta.
This study may provide a basis for the possible application of miR-940 in illustrating the molecular pathogenic mechanism of ovarian cancer.
To investigate the expression of miR-940 in the hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and its impact on function and biological mechanism in the HCC cells.
This meta-analysis demonstrates that within the Caucasian population, the NLRP1 rs12150220 polymorphism may correlate with a decreased risk of vitiligo-associated autoimmune diseases, especially autoimmune Addison's disease, type 1 diabetes, or systemic lupus erythematosus.
Gene variants known to contribute to Autoimmune Addison's disease (AAD) susceptibility include those at the MHC, MICA, CIITA, CTLA4, PTPN22, CYP27B1, NLRP-1 and CD274 loci.
NLRP1 is genetically associated with risk of several autoimmune diseases including generalized vitiligo, Addison disease, type 1 diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis, and others.
Investigating large patient cohorts from six different autoimmune diseases, that is autoimmune Addison's disease (n=333), type 1 diabetes (n=1086), multiple sclerosis (n=502), rheumatoid arthritis (n=945), systemic lupus erythematosus (n=156) and juvenile idiopathic arthritis (n=505), against 3273 healthy controls, we analyzed four single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in NALP1.
Forty-four formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded MRCL samples and 60 control cases (atypical/well-differentiated liposarcoma, pleomorphic liposarcoma, low-grade myofibrosarcoma, etc.)
The most frequent acupoints of acupuncture for PCOS were Sanyinjiao (SP 6), Guanyuan (CV 4), Zigong (EX-CA 1), Zhongji (CV 3) and Qihai (CV 6).
In the modern treatment of acupuncture for PCOS, Sanyinjiao (SP 6), Guanyuan (CV 4), Zigong (EX-CA 1), Zhongii (CV 3) and Qihai (CV 6) are most used.
Carbonic anhydrase II (CA II) has an important role in thyroid hormone synthesis via regulating iodide (I-) transport across thyroidal cell membranes and the existence of autoantibodies against CA I and/or CA II have been shown in sera from patient with various autoimmune diseases such as Sjoegren's Syndrome, Systemic Lupus Erythmatosus, type 1 diabetes, primary biliary cirrhosis and ulcerative colitis.
Efforts to inhibit the chemokine receptor CCR9 using the agent CCX282-B in Crohn's disease were not successful.
Other therapeuticals that might find their way to the market the coming years include the anti-mucosal vascular addressin cell adhesion molecule (MAdCAM) PF-00547659, small molecules (including laquinimod and the CCR9 antagonist Vercirnon), as well as an orally active SMAD7 antisense oligonucleotide that showed clinical benefit in Crohn's disease patients.
The chemokine CCL25, and its receptor CCR9, constitute a unique chemokine/receptor pair, which regulates trafficking of T lymphocytes to the small intestine under physiological conditions and is an attractive target for small bowel Crohn's disease drug development.
Vercirnon is a CCR9 chemokine receptor antagonist being developed for the treatment of Crohn's disease.
It is well established that the passive trans-placental passage of anti-Ro/SSA antibodies from mother to foetus is associated with the risk to develop an uncommon syndrome named neonatal lupus (NLE), where the congenital heart block represents the most severe clinical feature.
The characteristics of NLE that were studied included congenital complete heart block (CCHB), second degree heart block, and hepatic fibrosis.
Sera from patients known to frequently produce precipitating anti-SS-A/Ro antibody (subacute cutaneous lupus erythematosus [SCLE], 56 patients; Sjoegren's syndrome [SS], 41 patients; mothers of infants with neonatal LE [NLE], 10 individuals; infants with congenital heart block [CHB], 5 patients) were tested for reactivity to RoSP7-24 in ELISA.
NLE is manifested most typically as transient subacute cutaneous lupus lesions or isolated complete congenital heart block.
Our findings also suggested that the inhibitory effects of AC-93253 iodide on lung cancer progression may be attributable to its ability to modulate multiple proteins, including Src, PI3K, JNK, Paxillin, p130cas, MEK, ERK, and EGFR.
Paxillin and FAK activity are reduced in lung cancer cell lines following wiskostatin and nWASP knockdown as shown by immunofluorescence and western blot.
Taken together, these results suggested that treatment with DBL may act as a potential candidate to inhibit lung cancer metastasis by inhibiting MMP-2 and -9 via affecting PI3K/AKT, MAPKs, FAK/paxillin, EMT/Snail and Slug, Nrf2/antioxidant enzymes, and NFKB signaling pathways.
EL decreased phosphorylation of FAK and its downstream targets, Src, paxillin, and decreased mRNA expression of cell motility-related genes, RhoA, Rac1, and Cdc42 in lung cancer cells.
It efficiently inhibits metastasis on NSCLC by reducing vascularization, and eliciting depression of the PI3K-AKT and FAK-Paxillin signaling pathways.
Here, we assessed the impact of CD101 on the course of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD).
Using a T-cell transfer model of chronic colitis, we found that in recipients of naive T cells from CD101(+/+) donors up to 30% of the recovered lymphocytes expressed CD101, correlating with an increased interleukin (IL)-2-mediated FoxP3 expression.
Transfer of CD101(-/-) T cells caused more severe colitis and was associated with an expansion of IL-17-producing T cells and an enhanced expression of IL-2RAlfa/Beta independently of FoxP3.
The co-transfer of naive and regulatory T cells (Treg) protected most effectively from colitis, when both donor and recipient mice expressed CD101.
Thus, CD101 deficiency is a novel marker for progressive colitis and potential target for therapeutic intervention.
Subgroups of T cells (Th : CD4(+) or Tc : CD8(+) ); naive (CD27(+) CD28(+) CD45RA(+) CCR7(+) ), central memory (CD27(+) CD28(+) CD45RA(-) CCR7(+) ), effector memory (early differentiated; CD27(+) CD28(+) CD45RA(-) CCR7(-) and late differentiated; CD27(-) CD28(-) CD45RA(-) CCR7(-) ), terminally differentiated effector cells (TEMRA; CD27(-) CD28(-) CD45RA(+) CCR7(-) ) and Treg (CD4(+) CD25(+) FOXP3(+) CD127(-) ) cells, and their expression of CD39, CD45RA, CD101 and CD129, were studied by flow cytometry in T1D and/or coeliac disease children or without any of these diseases (reference group).
Children with exclusively coeliac disease had a higher MFI of CD101 (P &lt; 0*01), as well as a higher percentage of CD129(+) (P &lt; 0*05), in the CD4(+) CD25(hi) lymphocyte population, compared to references.
Conversely, children with coeliac disease show signs of CD101(+) /CD129(+) Treg cells that may indicate suppressor activity.
Further, to define the mechanism of action that explains the differential ability of C57BL/6 Treg versus dnTGF-BetaRII Treg on the ability to down-regulate autoimmune cholangitis, we noted significant differential expression of glycoprotein A repetitions predominant (GARP), CD73, CD101 and CD103 and a functionally significant increase in interleukin (IL)-10 in Treg from C57BL/6 compared to dnTGF-BetaRII mice.
CD101-knockout mice generated on the B6 background also exhibit substantially more severe N. aromaticivorans-induced liver disease correlating with increased IFN-Gamma and IL-17 responses compared with wild-type mice.
Gastric juice from 15 normals, 20 patients with gastric ulcer and 14 patients with erosive haemorrhagic gastroduodenitis was investigated in respect of its activity on unheated and heated fibrin plates and its content of FDP and plasminogen or plasmin with immunochemical methods.
The patients with erosive haemorrhagic gastroduodenitis showed no increase in fibrinolysis in the blood, but low values for plasminogen and alpha2-M, and the serum contained FDP.
In the patient's lymphocytes, mRNA expression of TGFBeta2 was lower than control, and might cause DORV as it does in TGFBeta2-deficient mice.
Activin BA, follistatin, and activin receptor type IIA proteins were observed in normal and cleft palate tissues throughout pregnancy (gestational weeks 11 to 40).
We have previously shown that follistatin-deficient mice have numerous embryonic defects including shiny, taut skin, growth retardation, and cleft palate leading to death within hours of birth.
Two rheumatic disease patients had a relatively high titer of IgG(2)anti-p80-coilin antibodies.
The IgG(2)subclass of anti-p80-coilin antibodies may be a specific marker for systemic autoimmune disease.
The patients with localized scleroderma who were positive for anti-p80-coilin antibody had all been classified as having linear scleroderma.
Our data indicate that anti-p80-coilin antibody is uncommon in skin diseases: however, this antibody is present in patients with a milder form of linear scleroderma, although the incidence of positivity may not be high.
We also discuss several of the antigen-autoantibody systems found in systemic lupus erythematosus (Smith antigen, U1-nuclear ribonucleoprotein, SS-A/Ro, SS-B/La, proliferating cell nuclear antigen ribosomal ribonucleoprotein, double-strand DNA, histones, antiphospholipids, Ku, Ki/SL), systemic sclerosis (centromere, topo I, RNA polymerases, fibrillarin, polymyositis-Scl, Th/To), polymyositis/dermatomyositis (transferRNA synthetases, signal recognition particle, and others), and SS (SS-A/Ro, SS-B/La, nucleolar organizing region-90, p80-coilin), addressing their clinical significance, common detection methods, immunogenetic associations, and the molecular and cellular biology of the cognate antigens.
However, IL-17 deficiency did not affect the development of dermatitis at all, in clear contrast to that of arthritis and aortitis.
The development of arthritis and aortitis was significantly suppressed by the deficiency of TNFalpha or IL-17.
Apolipoprotein E (ApoE) has been extensively studied in Alzheimer's disease (AD), but little is known of apolipoprotein A-I (ApoA-I) in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF).
Objective To evaluate the efficacy of Ganoderma lucidum preparation on the behaviors,biochemistry,and autoimmunity parameters of mouse models of APP/PS-1 double transgenic Alzheimer's disease(AD).Methods A total of 44 4-month-old APP/PS-1 double transgenic AD mice were randomly divided into AD model group,Aricept group,Ganoderma lucidum middle-dose(LZ-M)group,and Ganoderma lucidum high-dose(LZ-H)group,with 11 mice in each group.In addition,10 4-month-old C57BL/6 mice were used as the control group.Water maze test was conducted to observe the behavior changes,and the protein expressions in brain tissues were detected by Western blot analysis.The autoimmune indicators were detected by indirect immunofluorescence method.Results In the navigation experiment,the time of finding the platform was gradually shortened since the 2nd day in the control,LZ-H,and LZ-M groups,and the time of searching the platform in the AD model group gradually increased.On the 5th day,the time of finding platform was significantly shorter in control group (t=5.607,P=0.000) and LZ-H group(t=2.750,P=0.010)than AD model group.In the space exploration experiment,the number of crossing the target platform(t=2.452,P=0.025)and the residence time in the target quadrant(t=2.530,P=0.020)in AD model group mice was significantly smaller/shorter than those in control group;in addition,the number of crossing the target platform in the AD model group was significantly smaller than that in LZ-H group(t=2.317,P=0.030)and LZ-M group(t=2.443,P=0.030),while the residence time in target quadrant decreased significantly(t=2.770,P=0.020)compared with LZ-H group;the number of crossing through the target platform quadrant(t=2.493,P=0.022)and residence time in the target quadrant(t=2.683,P=0.015)in LZ-H group were significantly higher than in Aricept group.Western blot analysis showed that the expression of ApoA1 in the brain tissues of mice in LZ-H and LZ-M groups were significantly higher than those in AD model group(P&lt;0.01,P&lt;0.05);ABeta-40 expression in LZ-H group was significantly lower than that in AD model group(P&lt;0.05);the expressions of Syt1,ApoE,and ABCA1 in brain tissues of mice in LZ-H group were significantly higher than those in model group(P&lt;0.01,P&lt;0.05).The plasma IgG level in Aricept group(t=30.945,P=0.000),LZ-M group(t=25.639,P=0.000)and LZ-H group(t=4.689,P=0.001)were significantly higher than that in the control group.Conclusion Ganoderma lucidum preparation can improve behavior disorders of AD model mice,promote the expressions of ApoA1,ApoE and Syt1,inhibit the expression of ABeta-40 protein,and improve the autoimmune function.
We aimed to explore the correlations between eukaryotic translation initiation factor 3, subunit A (eIF3a) polymorphisms and susceptibility to and chemoradiotherapy efficacy in cervical carcinoma.
Compared with carriers of the CC genotype, carriers of the T genotype of the eIF3a Arg803Lys C&gt;T polymorphism had a higher risk of cervical carcinoma.
Univariate analysis revealed that age, eIF3a Arg803Lys C&gt;T polymorphism, differentiation degree, FIGO stage, and LNM were prognostic factors of cervical carcinoma, and multivariate analysis showed that age &gt;= 60 years, higher FIGO stage, and LNM, as well as the CT and TT genotypes of the eIF3a Arg803Lys C&gt;T polymorphism, were risk factors related to the prognosis of cervical carcinoma.
The eIF3a Arg803Lys C&gt;T polymorphism is connected with a higher susceptibility to cervical carcinoma and may affect chemoradiotherapy efficacy in and prognosis of cervical carcinoma.
These findings suggest that the p185 neu may be a prognostic indicator not only for breast adenocarcinomas but also for lymphoproliferative disorders, and that the transforming p185 protein may be involved in the mechanisms of aggressive expansion of lymphoid neoplasias.
The authors investigated the correlation between clinicopathologic factors and the overexpression of the p185(HER2) in Korean gastric adenocarcinoma patients, and determined whether the antiproliferative effects of anti- p185(HER2) antibody can also be observed on gastric cancer cell lines that overexpress this growth factor receptor.
We evaluated the relationship between p185(HER2) overexpression and clinicopathological features in 94 (M: F=52: 42) gastric adenocarcinoma patients (median age 59 years).
To explore the role of humanized anti-p185(HER2) monoclonal antibody trastuzumab (Herceptin ) in vitro, the growth curve of Korean gastric cancer cells that overexpress the p185(HER2) protein was studied and a cell cycle analysis was performed.
p185(HER2) overexpression was found to be more frequent in advanced gastric cancer than early gastric cancer (54.1% vs 24.2%, p=0.008).
Among several Korean gastric cancer cell lines, SNU-1, SNU-5, and SNU-620 overexpress p185(HER2).
Trastuzumab inhibited the proliferation of p185(HER2) overexpressed Korean gastric cancer cell line by 21% with down-regulation of p185(HER2) protein expression.
S: Taken together, our observations suggest the potential prognostic significance of p185(HER2) overexpression in Korean gastric adenocarcinoma patients and point to the need for further research on this mechanism.
This suggests the possible use of p185(HER2) as a therapeutic target in gastric cancer.
Administration of trastuzumab, a fully humanized monoclonal antibody targeted to the human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2, p185), has improved outcomes for patients with HER2-positive gastric cancer (GC), but some relevant issues remain to be investigated and will emerge with new anti-GC drugs.
Eukaryotic translation initiation factor 3 subunit A (eIF3a) plays critical roles in regulating the initiation of protein translation, and eIF3a is highly expressed in lung cancer.
In this study, we investigated the association of the positively selected SNPs of eIF3a with the response to and toxicity of platinum-based chemotherapy in Chinese patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
The positively selected SNPs of eIF3a are significantly correlated with platinum-based chemotherapy toxicities in Chinese NSCLC patients.
To investigate the correlation between eukaryotic translation initiation factor 3, subunit A (eIF3a) and human epididymis protein 4 (HE4) expression and ovarian cancer.
RT-PCR or immunohistochemistry was used to examine eIF3a and HE4 mRNA or protein expression in ovarian tissues from patients with ovarian cancer (n=181) or benign ovarian tumors, or from the healthy women.
There were significant differences in mRNA and protein expression of eIF3a and HE4 among normal ovarian tissues, benign ovarian tumor tissues, and ovarian cancer tissues (P&lt; 0.05).
There were significant differences in mRNA expression of eIF3a and HE4 between the normal tissues and the ovarian cancer tissues, or between the benign ovarian tumor tissues and the normal tissues (P&lt; 0.001).
The mRNA expression of eIF3a in the normal ovarian tissues was significantly higher than that in the benign ovarian tumor tissues or that in the ovarian cancer tissues.
Positive expression rates for eIF3a or HE4 protein in normal, benign tumor, and cancer tissues were 0, 66.7%, and 81.0% or 0, 27.8%, and 56.2%, respectively.
There were significant differences in positive expression rates of eIF3a protein and HE4 protein between the ovarian tumor tissues and benign ovarian tumor tissues, between the ovarian cancer tissues and the normal ovarian tissues, or between the benign ovarian tumor tissues and the normal ovarian tissues (P&lt; 0.001).
The expressions of eIF3a and HE4 are associated with ovarian cancer, and extracellular regulated protein kinases may play a role in the interaction between eIF3a and HE4.
We describe an ultrasensitive electrochemical nucleic acid assay amplified by carbon nanotubes (CNTs)-based labels for the detection of human acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL)-related p185 BCR-ABL fusion transcript.
Plasma levels of annexin V-MP, endothelial-derived MP, platelet-derived MP (CD61+ and P-Selectin+), leukocyte-derived MP, tissue factor-bearing (TF+) and CD36+MP were prospectively measured in 20 patients with III degree obesity (BMI &gt;= 40 kg/m(2)) before (T0) and 3 (T3) and 12 (T12) months after sleeve gastrectomy (SLG).
Key messages Bilirubin levels are inversely related to cardiovascular disease, and overexpression of heme oxygenase-1 (the enzyme that determines bilirubin production) has prevented post-infarction ventricular remodeling in experimental animals, but the association between bilirubin levels and the progression of ventricular volumes and function in patients with acute myocardial infarction remained unexplored.
HO-1 is known to be protective in the setting of acute myocardial infarction.
In vitro experiments revealed enteropeptidase as a putative substrate for Bace1 suggesting a role in acute pancreatitis.
acute necrotizing pancreatitis was induced in anesthetized pigs by the retrograde infusion of 1 ml/kg of 5% sodium taurocholate and 8 U/kg enterokinase in the pancreatic duct.
Conversely, duodenopancreatic reflux of proteolytically active enteropeptidase may cause acute and chronic pancreatitis.
A noninvasive model of necrohemorrhagic pancreatitis induced by simultaneous intravenous cerulein/enterokinase (EK) infusion has recently been established in rats.
Study hemodynamic pattern and lipoperoxidation during methylene blue (MB) treatment on taurocholate - enterokinase induced acute pancreatitis (AP).
The HLA-B47,DR7 haplotype in congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency contains a deletion of most of the active CYP21 gene and the entire adjacent C4B gene.
The HLA haplotype A3-Cw6-B47-C4A91-BQ0-DR7 is associated with congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH), since it only carries the dysfunctional steroid 21-hydroxylase A pseudogene as well as the 5' adjacent complement C4A gene.
The mutation of vesicle-associated membrane protein-associated protein B (VAPB) was proved to cause family amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (FALS).
ALS8 is a late-onset familial autosomal dominant form of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) caused by a point mutation (P56S) in the VAPB gene (VAMP associated protein isoform B).
This supports the loss of VAPB function in ALS8 pathogenesis and suggests that reducing intracellular PtdIns4P might be an effective therapeutic strategy in delaying progressive loss of motor neurons.
Mutations in VAP-B that have been identified in familial forms of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS or Lou-Gehrig's disease) cause aggregation of the VAP-B protein, which then impairs its binding to several proteins, including Nir2.
A mutation in VAPB causes a familial form of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis.
We present two cases of Peters anomaly (Peters plus syndrome and a maximum manifestation variant) with abnormally thickened cornea and corneal staphyloma.
Wnt3a and Wnt5a are ligands orchestrating the canonical and non-canonical pathways, respectively, with involvement in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
To investigate member 3a of Wingless-type MMTV integration site family (Wnt3a) expression in cancerous and surrounding tissues and the relationship between clinicopathologic features of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and Wnt3a expression.
We then use a realistic GENESIS model to test two hypothesis about interneuron hypofunction and conclude that a reduction in GAD67 is the most likely candidate as the cause for hypofrontality as observed in Schizophrenia.
The objective of this study was to determine the effect of the CYP3A5 and ATP binding cassette subfamily B member 1 (ABCB1) single-nucleotide polymorphisms on the disposition of sunitinib and SU12662, on clinical response, and on the manifestation of toxicities in Asian metastatic renal cell carcinoma patients.
Polymorphisms in VEGFR3 and CYP3A5*1 might be able to define a subset of patients with renal-cell carcinoma with decreased sunitinib response and tolerability.
To examine whether common genetic variation at the SLC10A1 locus is associated with risk of persistent HBV infection, haplotype-tagging and imputed single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were assessed in two case-control sample sets, totally including 2,550 cases (persistently HBV infected subjects, PIs) and 2,124 controls (spontaneously recovered subjects, SRs) of Southern Chinese ancestry.
The effectiveness of topical terbinafine (TBF) to tinea pedis was evaluated an animal model in which guinea pigs were experimentally infected through their planta pedis with Trichophyton mentagrophytes, then a 1% TBF or butenafine (BTF) cream was administered topically once daily for 4 consecutive weeks.
However, mutations in RecQL4 result in three human disorders: (I) Rothmund-Thomson syndrome (RTS), (II) RAPADILINO and (III) Baller-Gerold syndrome (BGS).
This is in accordance with clinical and epidemiological findings demonstrating that defects in three RecQL helicases, i.e., WRN, BLM, RECQL4, are related to human progeroid and cancer predisposition syndromes, i.e., Werner, Bloom, and Rothmund Thomson syndrome, respectively.
Human RecQ homologs include RECQ1, BLM, WRN, RECQ4, and RECQ5Beta, three of which have been linked to diseases with elevated risk of cancer and growth defects (Bloom Syndrome and Rothmund-Thomson Syndrome) or premature aging (Werner Syndrome).
Depletion of PAICS largely cancelled breast cancer expansion, exemplifying a prognostic gene with breast cancer activity.
We propose that pharmacological inhibition of components within this network, such as PAICS, may be used in conjunction with the Fra-1 prognostic classifier towards personalized management of poor prognosis breast cancer.
Our goal was to investigate de novo purine biosynthetic gene PAICS expression and evaluate its role in prostate cancer progression.
Next-generation sequencing, qRTPCR and immunoblot analysis revealed an elevated expression of a de novo purine biosynthetic gene, Phosphoribosylaminoimidazole Carboxylase, Phosphoribosylaminoimidazole Succinocarboxamide Synthetase (PAICS) in a progressive manner in prostate cancer.
Through several in vitro and in vivo functional studies, we show that PAICS is necessary for proliferation and invasion in prostate cancer cells.
We identified JQ1, a BET bromodomain inhibitor previously implicated in regulating MYC expression and demonstrated role in prostate cancer, abrogates PAICS expression in several prostate cancer cells.
Here, we report that evaluation of PAICS in prostate cancer progression and its role in prostate cancer cell proliferation and invasion and suggest it as a valid therapeutic target.
We suggest JQ1, a BET-domain inhibitor, as possible therapeutic option in targeting PAICS in prostate cancer.
We discovered increased expression of phosphoribosyl amidotransferase (PPAT) and phosphoribosylaminoimidazole carboxylase, phosphoribosylaminoimidazole succinocarboxamide synthetase (PAICS) enzymes of de novo purine biosynthetic pathway in lung adenocarcinomas.
Transcript analyses from next-generation RNA sequencing and gene expression profiling studies suggested that PPAT and PAICS can serve as prognostic biomarkers for aggressive lung adenocarcinoma.
Furthermore we identified genomic amplification and aneuploidy of the divergently transcribed PPAT-PAICS genomic region in a subset of lung cancers.
In summary, this study reveals the regulatory mechanisms by which purine biosynthetic pathway enzymes PPAT and PAICS, and pyruvate kinase activity is increased and exposes an existing metabolic vulnerability in lung cancer cells that can be explored for pharmacological intervention.
We also identified mutations in four genes (MUC19, PAICS, RBMXL1, KIF23) never reported in melanoma, which might deserve further investigations.
Alterations in PAICS expression in humans have been associated with various types of cancer.
An IST1 clone, detected for the first time in 2000, was the most prevalent and responsible for the shigellosis epidemic in 2001 to 2003.
Patients with chronic kidney disease have high levels of serum sclerostin.
Sclerostin has been implicated in the pathogenesis of vascular calcification, which may promote the cardiovascular events of morbidity and mortality in chronic kidney disease patients.
However, the role of sclerostin in vascular calcification and clinical prognosis in chronic kidney disease remains elusive.
Nonetheless, anti-sclerostin antibodies may be a new therapeutic approach to increase bone mass and strength in chronic kidney disease.
This review aims to have a better understanding of the relationship of serum sclerostin with vascular calcification and clinical outcome in chronic kidney disease patients, and propose the application of anti-sclerostin therapy in chronic kidney disease.
In this observational, cross-sectional study, circulating levels of sclerostin and other laboratory parameters of mineral and bone disease, including intact parathyroid hormone (PTH), calcium, phosphate, magnesium, 25(OH) D-vitamin, 1,25 (OH)2 D-vitamin, and bone specific alkaline phosphatase (BALP) were assessed in 100 patients with end-stage renal disease recruited from an ongoing longitudinal cohort study in Stockholm, Sweden.
Findings from research into mineral bone disorder associated with CKD (CKD-MBD) could help the medical community to better understand the vascular actions of certain molecules, such as phosphates, fibroblast growth factor 23, parathyroid hormone, sclerostin, or vitamin D and their relevance to the management of different pathologies in the general population.
In chronic kidney disease (CKD), sclerostin is a putative driver of the bone-vascular axis.
Clinical inference relating sclerostin levels found in the general, CKD and dialysis populations is largely influenced by the assay used to measure this biomarker.
(3) Compared with the control group, the expression of CD63 in basophils increased in anaphylactic shock lung tissue.
To elucidate a potential mechanism involving BM88/Cend1, RanBPM and Dyrk1B in cell cycle progression/exit, we transiently co-expressed these proteins in mouse neuroblastoma Neuro 2a cells.
Calcium imaging experiments revealed that P2Y-induced calcium mobilization is diminished in mouse neuroblastoma Neuro 2a cells stably transfected with BM88 (N2A-BM88 cells) as compared with N2A cells or N2A cells differentiated with retinoic acid.
We report here that trichostatin-A (TSA) specifically induces the transcription of Cend1, a neuronal-lineage specific regulator of cell cycle exit and differentiation, in neuroblastoma Neuro2A cells, but not in non-neuronal cells.
Here we have used mouse neuroblastoma Neuro 2a cells as an in vitro model of neuronal differentiation to dissect the functional properties of BM88 by implementing gain- and loss-of-function approaches.
BM88 overexpression also results in increased levels of the cell cycle regulatory protein p53, and accumulation of the hypophosphorylated form of the retinoblastoma protein leading to cell cycle arrest, with concomitant decreased levels and, in many cells, cytoplasmic localization of cyclin D1.
Previous studies have shown that the BM88 antigen, a neuron-specific molecule, promotes the differentiation of mouse neuroblastoma cells [23] (Mamalaki A., Boutou E., Hurel C., Patsavoudi E., Tzartos S. and Matsas R. (1995) The BM88 antigen, a novel neuron-specific molecule, enhances the differentiation of mouse neuroblastoma cells.
Moreover, they respond differentially to growth factors [10] (Gomez J., Boutou E., Hurel C., Mamalaki A., Kentroti S. , Vernadakis A. and Matsas R. (1998) Overexpression of the neuron-specific molecule BM88 in mouse neuroblastoma cells: Altered responsiveness to growth factors.
Previous studies have shown that the BM88 antigen, a novel neuron-specific molecule, promotes the differentiation of mouse neuroblastoma (Neuro 2a) cells.
In conclusion, our findings show that overexpression of the neuron-specific antigen BM88 in neuroblastoma cells modifies their properties with respect to growth factor sensitivity, and, hence, the Neuro 2a and Neuro 2a-BM88 are suitable cell models to examine the role of growth factors in neuronal differentiation.
Here, we investigated the expression stabilities of ten previously recommended reference genes (ABCT, CYP, EF1A, FBOX, GPDH, RPL30, TUA4, TUB4, TUA5, and UNK2) in soybean under biotic stress from Bean pod mottle virus (BPMV), powdery mildew (PMD), soybean aphid (SBA), and two-spotted spider mite (TSSM).
In conclusion, the anti-B7-1 antibody approach may provide a novel therapy for allergic asthma.
To investigate whether there is altered expression and the clinical significance of soluble co-stimulatory molecules in asthmatic patients, plasma concentrations of sCTLA-4, sCD28, sCD80 and sCD86 in 51 adult allergic asthmatic adults with or without steroid treatment, and 35 sex- and age-matched control subjects were measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
The surface expression of T cell costimulatory molecules CTLA-4 and CD28 and their counter-ligands, B7 molecules (CD80, CD86), is differentially induced for T cell activation and expansion in allergic asthma.
Plasma concentrations of soluble CTLA-4 (sCTLA-4), CD28, CD80 and CD86 in 51 children with chronic allergic asthma with or without inhaled corticosteroid treatment, and 22 sex- and age-matched control subjects were measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.
Plasma sCTLA-4, sCD28 and sCD80 concentrations are elevated in allergic asthma.
The percentage of myoglobin denaturation (PMD) of the CA groups was also increased according to the level of CA during storage.
Low expression of (or IHC-negative) COX2, miR-200c, ERCC1 and TS, or high expression of (or IHC-positive) CDC25B and p16 are potential biomarkers for predicting the response of esophageal cancer patients treated with chemo(radio)therapy.
ERCC1-SNP in combination with mRNA ERCC1, DPYD, and ERBB2 from pretherapeutic endoscopic biopsies can predict minor response to chemoradiation, as a basis for individualized therapy of advanced esophageal cancer.
ERCC1 C118T could be a predictive factor for the response to radiotherapy and chemotherapy, but not a prognostic factor for OS in esophageal cancer patients after surgery.
In the present meta-analysis, we demonstrated that the ERCC1 rs3212986 polymorphism was significantly correlated with the response rate of esophageal cancer patients to neoadjuvant therapy (OR =  .49, 95% CI = 0.31-0.76, heterogeneity P = 0.480).
Furthermore, a considerable correlation was observed between ERCC1 rs11615 and the response rate of esophageal cancer patients to neoadjuvant therapy (OR = 0.228, 95% CI = 0.125-0.418, heterogeneity P = 0.291).
These findings indicate that the ERCC1 rs11615 and ERCC1 rs312986 polymorphisms may be candidate pharmacogenomic factors capable of predicting the response rate of esophageal cancer patients who accept neoadjuvant therapy.
The expression levels of melanoma-associated antigen (MAGE) A, MAGE-C1/CT7, cancer/testis antigen 1B (CTAG1B) and G antigen (GAGE) were analyzed by immunohistochemistry.
In papillary and follicular carcinoma, MAGE-A was present in 8.1% of cases, GAGE in 10.8% and CT/7MAGE-C1 and CTAG1B in 2.7% each.
In medullary carcinoma, CT antigen expression was as follows: MAGE-A in 42.9% of patients; MAGE-C1/CT7 in 46.5%; GAGE in 92.9%; and CTAG1B in 3.6%.
In poorly differentiated and anaplastic carcinoma cases, CT antigen expression was as follows: MAGE-A in 61.8% of cases; MAGE-C1 in 57.1%; GAGE in 66.7%; and CTAG1B in 14.4%.
In patients with colon cancer, the expression of TSP50, MAGE-A(1-6), and SSX1,2,4 genes was associated with a poor prognosis, that of MAGE-C1 and XAGE1 was related to a favorable prognosis.
Consequently, the expression of CT antigens MAGE-A1, MAGE-A4, CT7/MAGE-C1, NY-ESO-1, and GAGE was analyzed in a series of pediatric melanomas.
In this study, we show that the dying myeloma cells treated with chaetocin resulted in the induction of heat shock protein (HSP) 90, which was inhibited by antioxidant N-acetyl cysteine, and showed an increase in the expression of MAGE-A3 and MAGE-C1/CT7.
We used immunohistochemistry to examine the expression of four CTAs (MAGE-A, NY-ESO-1, CT7, and GAGE7) in various types of salivary gland carcinoma (n = 95).
When carcinoma cases were divided into low-grade and intermediate/high-grade types, NY-ESO-1 and CT7 were expressed more frequently in intermediate/high-grade carcinomas.
The expression of cancer testis antigen MAGE C1 has been linked to the malignant stem cell in this disease, and thus, we investigated the use of both flow cytometric and qRTPCR approaches to monitor its expression as an alternative monitoring methodology in this pilot study.
These variants were found in genes associated with cancers (ANKRD35, DNAH9, MAGEC1, TOX3) or participating in cancer-related signaling pathways (THSD1, MORN2, PTCRA).
Our study aims to analyze the expression pattern, mechanism, and prognostic significance of melanoma-associated antigen MAGE-C1 and MAGE-C2 in breast cancer.
Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and immunohistochemistry were used to investigate the expressions of MAGE-C1 and MAGE-C2 in breast benign disease specimens, tumor-free breast specimens, and breast cancer specimens; their correlation with clinicopathologic parameters and recurrence-free survival was elucidated.
We examined the influence of DNA methylase inhibitor 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-aza-CdR) together with histone deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin A on the expression of MAGE-C1 and MAGE-C2 in breast cancer cell lines.
Proteins for MAGE-C1 and MAGE-C2 expressions were 38.3% and 58.3% in breast cancer specimens, messenger RNA for MAGE-C1 and MAGE-C2 expressions were 43.3% and 61.7%, respectively.
MAGE-C1 and MAGE-C2 maybe potential targets for tumor immunotherapy, and their expressions are associated with advanced breast cancer and poor outcome.
In the present study, we investigated expression patterns of nanog in the rat heart after acute myocardial infarction by semi-quantitative RT-PCR, immunohistochemistry and Western blot analyses.
MRI represents the gold standard tool for differential diagnosis (with schwannoma, paraganglioma and haemangioma) and correct staging, while immunohistochemical and cytomorphologic analysis (bcl-2 and CD34 positivity in 90% of cases) is needed for definitive diagnosis.
L'RMN rappresenta l'esame principale per escludere altre diagnosi (schwannoma, paragangliome ed emangioma) e per una corretta stadiazione mentre l'immunoistochimica e l'analisi citomorfologica (bcl-2 e CD34 positiva nel 90% dei casi) e la base per una diagnosi definitiva.
Disease-specific iPS cells were generated from skin fibroblasts obtained from the indicated PMD patient and two other PMD patients having a 637-kb chromosomal duplication including entire PLP1 and a novel missense mutation (W212C) of PLP1, by transfections of OCT3/4, C-MYC, KLF4 and SOX2 using retro-virus vectors.
Mice with increased KLF4 in NSCs and NSCs-derived ependymal cells developed hydrocephalus-like characteristics, including enlarged ventricles, thinned cortex, agenesis of the corpus callosum, and significantly reduced subcommissural organ.
These results indicate that down-regulation of KLF4 is critical for neural development and its dysregulation may lead to hydrocephalus.
Our findings further reveal that activated Akt and STAT3 pathways induce the upregulation of HIF1Alfa and its downstream targets (LDHA and PDK1), leading to increased glycolysis in myeloma cells.
We show the unprecedented role of the metabolic phenotype in inducing drug resistance through LDHA and HIF1A in multiple myeloma, and that specific inhibition of LDHA and HIF1A can restore sensitivity to therapeutic agents such as bortezomib and can also inhibit tumor growth induced by altered metabolism.
Novel drugs that regulate metabolic pathways in multiple myeloma, specifically targeting LDHA, can be beneficial to inhibit tumor growth and overcome drug resistance.
A 36,000-Mr protein purified from mouse myeloma on the basis of selective binding to a single-stranded DNA (ssDNA)-cellulose column has been identified as the lactate dehydrogenase A (LDH-A) subunit.
A homogeneous preparation of this mouse myeloma ssDNA-binding protein, termed the 'low-salt-eluting protein', was found to possess LDH activity, and rabbit antiserum prepared against this protein was shown to cross-react with purified 36,000-Mr LDH-A subunits from mouse and bovine sources.
These enzymic and immunological identities with LDH-A were not observed with purified helix-destabilizing protein 1 from mouse myeloma.
Concentrations of total lactate dehydrogenase (LDH; EC 1.1.1.27) and LDH isoenzyme patterns were studied in serum of 19 patients with multiple myeloma and in 19 healthy controls.
Defective DNA repair is tightly correlated with worse neurological outcomes after stroke, whereas upregulation of DNA repair enzymes, such as APE1, OGG1, and XRCC1, improves long-term functional recovery following stroke.
Our data showed that OGG1 Ser326Cys and XRCC1 Arg399Gln gene polymorphisms had impacts on the development of stroke.
Previously, our laboratory showed that mice lacking the BER glycosylases 8-oxoguanine glycosylase 1 (Ogg1) or nei endonuclease VIII-like 1 (Neil1) recover more poorly from focal ischemic stroke than wild-type mice.
Genotyping of polymorphisms of the OGG1 (Ser326Cys), XRCC1 (Arg399Gln), ERCC2 (Lys751Gln), and ERCC5 (Asp1104His) genes was performed and used to evaluate LAA stroke susceptibility.
A joint effect on risk elevation of LAA stroke was seen in those patients with OGG1 and ERCC2 polymorphisms (OR: 2.75, 95%CI: 1.26-6.00).
Moreover, among smokers carrying the OGG1 Ser326Cys polymorphism, there was a tendency toward an increased risk of LAA stroke in those patients who had a greater number of high-risk genotypes of XRCC1, ERCC2, and ERCC5 polymorphisms (p(trend)=0.010).
Among 22 patients who underwent LP shunt placement for IIH, 16 (72.8%) patients had severe and fulminant opening CSF pressures with values of more than 400 mmH(2)O.
This study implicates increased I(NaL) in excessive atrial APD prolongation and arrhythmic EAD occurrence in a congenital LQTS3 mouse model.
(1) To report the different patterns of NAL and discuss the mechanisms encountered; (2) to determine the relationship between a given type of lymphoma and a specific type of neuropathy; and (3) to assess the prognosis of NAL.
Two thousand four hundred ninety-three consecutive dermatitis patients in 9 dermatology clinics were patch tested with a TDM 6.6%, consisting of Disperse (D) Blue 35, D Yellow 3, D Orange 1 and 3, D Red 1 and 17, all 1.0% each, and D Blue 106 and D Blue 124, each 0.3%.
The name hydrolethalus refers to the main findings, namely polyhydramnios, hydrocephalus and lethality.
VACTERL with hydrocephalus appears distinct from hydrolethalus and similar conditions but is itself heterogeneous.
In this study, we evaluated the feasibility of combining p53-DC vaccine and rAd-p53 gene therapy, using the p53-overexpressing and non-expressing prostate cancer cells in vitro.
In addition, rAd-p53 infection can induce overexpression of p53 and thus the cytotoxicity of CTLs differentiated by the p53-DC vaccine in p53 non-expressing prostate cancer cells.
This study detected the migration of MSCs to high metastasis liver carcinoma cells MHCC-97H in vitro, investigated the inhibitory effect of rAd-NK4-MSCs on the growth and metastasis of MHCC-97H cells, further explored the inhibitory mechanism of rAd-NK4-MSCs to MHCC-97H cell metastasis, and examined the inhibitory effect of rAd-NK4-MSCs on the migration of human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) in vitro.
The present study was conducted to identify the anti-tumor effects of rAd/p53, which is a recombinant human serotype 5 adenovirus, in cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (cSCC).
Finally, the mechanistic experiments indicate that DUXAP10 could interact with Histone demethylase Lysine specific demethylase1 (LSD1) and repress tumor suppressors Large tumor suppressor 2 (LATS2) and Ras-related associated with diabetes (RRAD) transcription in NSCLC cells.
To compare clinical curative effects and toxicity of recombinant human adenovirus-p53 injection (rAd-p53, Gendicine) combining chemoradiotherapy (CRT)/radiotherapy (RT) with those obtained with CRT/RT alone in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC).
We used data generated from a haploid hydatidiform mole genome (CHM1) and a diploid human genome (NA12878) to test our approach.
Our results show the recovery of an allele of the non-coding minisatellite MS1 (located on chromosome 1 at 1p33-35) at greater than 97% identity to reference (GRCh38) from the unprocessed sequence data of a haploid complete hydatidiform mole (CHM1) cell line.
We demonstrate the utility of Alpha-CENTAURI in characterizing repeat structure for alpha satellite containing reads in the hydatidiform mole (CHM1, haploid-like) genome.
In order to overcome the issue of allelic diversity, we used genomic DNA from an essentially haploid hydatidiform mole, CHM1.
Consistent with these findings, we observed that in an IL-33-administered asthmatic airway inflammation model, IL-13 levels were markedly increased in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, but its levels were markedly suppressed by treatment with inhibitors of 5-LO, 12-LO or BLT2, further suggesting roles of 5-/12-LO in IL-33-induced IL-13 production.
Our results suggest that "MyD88-5-/12-LO-BLT2-NF-KB" cascade significantly contributes to the IL-33-induced synthesis of IL-13 in mast cells, thus potentially contributing to asthmatic development and exacerbation.
DNA methylation changes at a number of these genes have been linked to various forms of human disease, including cancers, such as asthma and acute myeloid leukemia (ALOX12), gastric cancer (EBF3), breast cancer (NAV1), colon cancer and acute lymphoid leukemia (KCNK15), Wilms tumor (protocadherin gene cluster; PCDHAs) and colorectal cancer (TCERG1L), suggesting a potential etiologic role for MEs in tumorigenesis and underscoring the possible developmental origins of these malignancies.
DNA methylation of ALOX12 may be an epigenetic biomarker for the risk of asthma-related phenotypes.
We provide evidence that MJD in five pedigrees of Azorean descent is also linked to chromosome 14q in an 18-cM region between the markers D14S67 and AACT (multipoint lod score +7.00 near D14S81).
Here we report linkage disequilibrium of rs2288904 with rs3087969 and the association of these SLC44A2 SNPs with Meniere's disease severity.
The association of SLC44A2 SNPs with VTE suggests that thrombi affecting cochlear vessels could be a factor in Meniere's disease.
A search of PubMed was made using the terms 'triple negative breast cancer' and 'tumor infiltrating lymphocytes', 'CD8', 'CD4', 'B cells', 'natural killer cells', 'macrophages', myeloid derived suppressor cells', 'dendritic cells', 'immune check point inhibitor', 'CTLA-4' and 'PD-L1'.
The aim of this study is to explore cytotoxic T lymphocyte associated antigen 4 (CTLA-4), programmed death 1 (PD-1) and programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1) distribution and clinical value in liquid biopsy (such as blood) of small cell lung cancer (SCLC) patients.
#背#景#与#目#的 #本#研#究#旨#在#探#索#细#胞#毒#性T#淋#巴#细#胞#相#关#抗#原 (cytotoxic T lymphocyte associated antigen-4, CTLA-4) #、#程#序#坏#死#因#子 (programmed death 1, PD-1) #和#程#序#坏#死#因#子#配#体 (programmed death ligand 1, PD-L1) #在#小#细#胞#肺#癌 (small cell lung cancer, SCLC) #患#者#外#周#血#中#的#分#布#情#况, #探#索#其#免#疫#作#用#机#制#并#评#估#其#作#为#生#物#标#志#物#的#临#床#价#值#。#方#法 #招#募290#例SCLC#患#者#及60#例#健#康#志#愿#者, #收#集#治#疗#前#和#治#疗2nd#周#期#末SCLC#患#者EDTA#抗#凝#血2 mL#。#应#用#流#式#细#胞#仪#检#测CTLA-4#、PD-1#和PD-L1#在#外#周#血CD3#、CD4#、CD8#及CD25#的#分#布, #分#析#其#与#临#床#病#理#特#征#的#相#关#性#；#采#用#细#胞#免#疫#化#学#法#和#流#式#细#胞#法#检#测PD-L1#在SCLC#细#胞#系H446#中#的#表#达#。#结#果 SCLC#患#者#外#周#血#中CTLA-4+#细#胞#和PD-1+#细#胞#水#平#分#别#为 (1.56+/-1.24) %#和 (8.07+/-3.97) %#、CTLA-4#在CD3#细#胞#和CD4#细#胞#中#的#表#达#水#平#无#明#显#差#异, #分#别#为 (4.87+/-5.18) %#和 (3.85+/-2.60) %, #均#低#于PD-1#在CD3+#或CD4+#细#胞#中#的#表#达 (26.63+/-9.04) %#和 (20.79+/-9.41) %, #与#健#康#对#照#组#相#比, SCLC#中CD4+CD25+CTLA-4+#细#胞#水#平#明#显#升#高 (1.91+/-1.27) % vs  (7.09+/-5.09) %, P&lt;0.001#；PD-1+ (CD8+) #细#胞#表#达#水#平#明#显#降#低, #分#别#为 (22.56+/-4.21) % vs  (11.47+/-5.85) %, P&lt;0.001#。CD4+CD25+CTLA-4+#细#胞#或CD8+PD-1+#细#胞#水#平#与#患#者#的#年#龄#、#性#别#、#吸#烟#状#况#、#临#床#分#期#以#及#是#否#转#移#等#因#素#无#关 (P&gt;0.05) #。#化#疗#两#周#期#末CD4+CD25+CTLA-4+#和CD8+PD-1+#细#胞#的#水#平#对#比#化#疗#前#明#显#下#降, #分#别#为 (5.11+/-2.60) % vs  (6.94+/-4.91) %#； (8.74+/-3.39) % vs  (11.48+/-5.91) %, P#值#均&lt;0.000,1, #但#与#无#疾#病#进#展#生#存#和#总#生#存#无#显#著#相#关#性#。PD-L1#高#表#达#于SCLC#细#胞#系H446#中#并#定#位#在#细#胞#膜#和#细#胞#浆, #但#在#外#周#血#中#未#见#表#达#。#结#论 #本#研#究#首#次#证#实SCLC#外#周#血#中CTLA4#高#表#达#于#调#节#性T#细#胞#中, #而PD-1#低#表#达#于#效#应#性T#细#胞, #该#结#果#为#揭#示SCLC#免#疫#监#测#点#免#疫#逃#逸#机#制#提#供#了#理#论#依#据, #可#能#作#为#一#种#新#的#无#创#性#且#可#实#时#监#测#的#生#物#标#志#物#。.
The present study deals with CTLA-4 gene selected polymorphisms (rs11571317 C/T and rs3087243G/A) to explore their relation with breast cancer susceptibility and progression in BC patients.
Autosomal disorders such as mutations of the phosphomannomutase 2 (PMM2) gene, the galactose-1-phosphate uridyltransferase (GALT) gene, the FSH receptor (FSHR) gene, chromosome 3q containing the Blepharophimosis gene and the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene, responsible for polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy, have been identified in patients with POF.
None exhibited any staining for cathepsin K, HMB-45, or microphthalmia transcription factor.
Osteoclast-specific genes such as Trap, osteopetrosis-associated transmembrane protein 1 (Ostm1), chloride channel 7 (Clcn7), cathepsin K (Ctsk) as well as osteoclast-specific transcription factor and microphthalmia transcription factor (MITF) were up-regulated in the treated cells, whilst the messenger RNA (mRNA) levels of Dspp, Dmp1 and Opg were reduced in the induced cells.
Cathepsin K is a protease whose expression is driven by microphthalmia transcription factor (MITF) in osteoclasts.
Among cell species that infiltrated in perichondral granulation, LCA, CD68 (monocytes/macrophages), and CD4 cells were dominant in number; MMP-8, MMP-9, and elastase were expressed only in the perichondral granulation; whereas MMP-3 and cathepsin K and L were detected in both chondrocytes and granulations.
Overexpression of microphthalmia transcription factor has been shown to mediate the expression of cathepsin-K in osteoclasts.
We studied cathepsin-K in 17 cytogenetically confirmed microphthalmia transcription factor/TFE-family translocation renal cell carcinomas.
Radiographs of the hands of 60 patients with cartilage hair hypoplasia (CHH), 69 with trichorhinophalangeal syndrome I (TRP I) and 11 with TRP II were examined, including 26 longitudinal observations.
We report here the new approach of fusing putidaredoxin reductase (PdR) to the carboxy-terminus of CYP101A1 (P450cam) via a linker peptide and reconstituting camphor hydroxylase activity with free putidaredoxin (Pdx).
For other diseases, a well-established example relates to CYP1B1 where homozygosity for rare mutations occurs in primary congenital glaucoma.
Rare CYP1B1 mutations and possibly polymorphisms may also contribute to risk for more common forms of glaucoma.
However, the effects of the potential herb-drug interactions (HDIs) between LCA and therapeutic drugs on the inhibition of human cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes remain unclear.
In the present study, the inhibitory effects of LCA on seven major human CYP isoforms, including CYP1A2, 2D6, 2E1, 2C19, 2C8, 2C9 and 3A4, were investigated in human liver microsomes (HLMs).
The results demonstrated that LCA significantly inhibited the activities of CYP1A2, 2C19, 2C8, 2C9 and 3A4 and exhibited weak inhibitory effects on CYP2E1 and CYP2D6.
Dixon and Lineweaver-Burk plots revealed that the inhibition types of LCA against CYP1A2, 2C9, 2C19 and 2C8 were best fit as mixed-type inhibitions, while LCA was a competitive inhibitor towards CYP3A4.
Furthermore, the areas under the plasma concentration-time curves (AUCs) of several drugs that are primarily metabolized by CYPs were estimated to increase by 2-398% in the presence of LCA, which suggested that LCA exhibited high HDI potentials via CYP inhibition.
To evaluate safety and efficacy of intravenous pulse cyclophosphamide (CyP) in acute macular serpiginous choroiditis (SC).
Diabetes significantly changed the kidney expression of Rage, Sod2, Tgfb1 and Ctgf, Pdp2, nephrin, and Lias.
The main findings were 1) obesity resulted in a 46% decrease in PDP activity expressed per milligram extracted mitochondrial protein only in RG, while PDP isoform content was unchanged; 2) 8 wk of endurance training led to a significant 1.4-2.2-fold increase in PDP activity of all muscle examined from obese rats, and the concomitant increase in PDP1 protein was only seen in soleus and RG; 3) 8 wk of endurance training led to a trending 1.4-2.2-fold increase in PDP activity of all muscle examined from obese rats, and the concomitant increase in PDP1 protein was only seen in soleus and RG; and 4) PDP2 protein content was not affected by obesity or training.
Starvation and streptozotocin-induced diabetes cause decreases in PDP2 mRNA abundance, PDP2 protein amount, and PDP activity in rat heart and kidney.
This study analyzed protein expression and DNA alterations for the KRAS, CDKN2A, SMAD4, and TP53 genes by immunohistochemistry and next-generation sequencing in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tumors in 356 patients with resected pancreatic adenocarcinoma who were treated at the Dana-Farber/Brigham and Women's Cancer Center (October 26, 2002, to May 21, 2012), University of Rochester Medical Center (March 1, 2006, to November 1, 2013), or Stanford Cancer Institute (September 26, 1995, to May 22, 2013).
We established a genetic diagnosis in six families with autosomal recessive HSP (SPG11 in three families and TFG/SPG57, SACS and ALS2 in one family each).
We are now performing molecular testing of the HSP patients using Sanger sequencing (SPG4, SPG11, SPG31, and ARSACS), comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) array (SPG1, 2, 3A, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 13, 15, 17, 20, 21, 31, 33, 39, 42, ABCD1, alsin, and ARSACS), and resequencing microarray (SPG1, 2, 3A, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 13, 17, 20, 21, 31, 33, and ABCD1).
Meanwhile, preliminary data showed that SPG11 and ARSACS were common in Japanese ARHSP families.
We are now performing molecular testing for the HSP patients using direct sequencing (SPG4, SPG31, and ARSACS), comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) array (SPG1/2/3A/4/5/6/7/8/10/11/13/15/17/20/21/31/33/39/42/ABCD1/alsin/SACS), and resequencing microarray (SPG1/2/3A/4/5/6/7/8/10/11/13/17/20/21/31/33/ABCD1).
Meanwhile, preliminary data showed that SPG11 and ARSACS were common in Japanese ARHSP families.
Autosomal recessive spastic ataxia of Charlevoix-Saguenay is an early onset form of hereditary spastic paraplegia with a peculiar clinical presentation.
On the basis of our data, we therefore suggest that social avoidance (expressed as social phobia or avoidant personality disorder) has been underestimated in previous studies of carriers with the FMR-1 full mutation or premutation.
Analysis of GenBank-derived clones on the Y chromosome revealed the presence of two full-length copies in azoospermia factor region b (AZFb) (PRY1 and PRY2) and two shorter versions of the PRY gene containing exons 3, 4 and 5 in AZFc (PRY3 and PRY4).
PRY1 and PRY2, two gene copies that are located in AZFb, a region often deleted in patients with severe male infertility, were shown to be expressed in the testis.
Expression of KIR3DL2 on NK and T cells was quantified in peripheral blood (PB) from 35 patients with SpA and 5 patients with juvenile enthesitis-related arthritis (juvenile ERA); samples were compared with samples from healthy and rheumatoid arthritis (RA) controls.
NKB1 inhibits cytoxic activity of T lymphocytes mediated by superantigens, which is one of the contributing factors in the pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
Killer Ig-like receptors (KIRs) are expressed on CD4(+)CD28(null) T cells, a highly oligoclonal subset of T cells that is expanded in patients with rheumatoid arthritis.
Functional involvement of NKAIN2 in miR-181d-regulated pancreatic cancer development was tested by small interfering RNA-mediated NKAIN2 knockdown in miR-181d-downregulated PANC-1 and AsPC-1 cells.
NKAIN2 was directly targeted by miR-181d in pancreatic cancer.
Small interfering RNA-mediated NKAIN2 knockdown reversed the inhibition of miR-181d downregulation on pancreatic cancer development.
Inhibiting miR-181d may suppress pancreatic cancer development, possibly through the inverse regulation on NKAIN2.
Recurrent chromosome breakpoints at 6q22.31, leading to truncation and potential loss-of-function of the NKAIN2 gene, in Chinese prostate cancer patients were previously identified.
In this study we investigated genomic, methylation and expression changes of NKAIN2 in a large number of prostate cancer samples and determined its functional role in prostate cancer cells.
Fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis confirmed that NKAIN2 truncation is specific to Chinese while deletion of the gene is frequent in both Chinese and UK prostate cancers.
Somatic mutations of NKAIN2 in prostate cancer samples exist but at very low frequency, suggesting that it is a putative tumor suppressor gene (TSG) with haploid insufficiency.
Our functional studies showed that overexpression of NKAIN2 in prostate cancer cells inhibits cellular growth by promoting cell apoptosis, and decreasing cell migration and invasion.
Conversely, knockdown of NKAIN2 promotes prostate cancer cell growth by inhibiting cell apoptosis, and increasing cell migration and invasion.
These data imply that NKAIN2 is a novel TSG whose activity is commonly reduced in prostate cancer.
Our recent work detected recurrent chromosomal truncation at the Na(+)/K(+) transporting ATPase interacting 2 (NKAIN2) gene in prostate cancer, which was also found to be truncated in leukemia and lymphoma, suggesting that NKAIN2 is potentially one of the TSGs located in the 6q commonly deleted region in human cancers.
Fluorescent in situ hybridisation with BAC/PAC clones and long range polymerase chain reaction products assessed in the human genome sequence localised the chromosome 1 breakpoint to a 9.8 kb segment within a hypothetical gene, LOC388735, and the chromosome 6 breakpoint to a 12.8 kb segment in intron 4 of the T-cell lymphoma breakpoint-associated target 1 (TCBA1) gene.
Disruption and/or formation of TCBA1 fusion genes in T cell lymphoma and leukaemia cell lines suggests a role for this gene in tumorigenesis.
We identified two T-cell lymphoma/leukemia cell lines with different differentiation stages that had breakpoints within the same novel gene, TCBA1 (T-cell lymphoma breakpoint associated target 1).
In a T-cell lymphoblastic lymphoma cell line, HT-1, the TCBA1 fused to SUSP1 (SUMO-1-specific protease), creating a SUSP1-TCBA1 chimeric gene.
However, in an adult T-cell leukemia cell line, ATN-1, no chimeric gene was detected, although aberrant TCBA1 transcripts were produced.
The expression levels of TUG1 were determined using Real-Time qPCR in a total of 44 patients with bladder urothelial carcinomas.
Bladder urothelial carcinoma T24 and 5637 cells were transfected with TUG1 siRNA or negative control siRNA.
TUG1 was up-regulated in bladder urothelial carcinoma compared to paired normal urothelium.
Cell proliferation inhibition and apoptosis induction were observed in TUG1 siRNA-transfected bladder urothelial carcinoma T24 and 5637 cells.
Our data suggest that lincRNA TUG1 is emerging as a novel player in the disease state of bladder urothelial carcinoma.
TUG1 may have potential roles as a biomarker and/or a therapeutic target in bladder urothelial carcinoma.
Serial samples of serum Cystatin C and urine NGAL were collected from 139 consecutive patients with congenital heart defects aged 3 days to 30 years after admission to the intensive care unit, 2 and 6 hours after the end of cardiopulmonary bypass.
Hyper-IgE syndrome (HIES) is a very rare primary immune deficiency characterized by elevated serum IgE levels, recurrent bacterial infections, chronic dermatitis, and connective tissue abnormalities.
We describe the clinical course of a 2-month-old infant who was evaluated for autosomal dominant Hyper IgE Syndrome based on eczema, periorbital cellulitis, skin abscesses, increased total IgE levels and blood eosinophilia.
IL-22 induces STAT3 phosphorylation and mediates psoriasis-related gene expression.
The IL-22-STAT3-Bcl-3 pathway may be important in the pathogenesis of psoriasis.
By using quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction, we identified significant upregulation of PMEPA1 gene expression in malignant tissues of patients with gastric adenocarcinoma.
By using developed antibodies, we observed pronounced expression of TMEPAI in normal gastric epithelial cells while tumor cells from gastric adenomas, and adenocarcinoma samples were mostly negative for target protein expression.
Analysis of expressed sequence tag databases showed that STAG1/PMEPA1 also was expressed in pancreatic, endometrial, and prostatic adenocarcinomas.
It is concluded that co-exposure to PM2.5 and FA exacerbated allergic asthma through oxidative stress and enhanced TRPV1 activation.
Our data suggests the involvement of TRPV1 in allergic asthma and thus we feel this target merits further investigation.
TNFAlfa, a proinflammatory cytokine known to be involved in the pathogenesis of allergic asthma, has been shown to induce hyperalgesia in somatic tissue via a sensitizing effect on dorsal root ganglion neurons expressing transient receptor potential vanilloid type 1 receptor (TRPV1).
Sequencing of genes known to be causative for WS [microphthalmia transcription factor (MITF), Pax3, Sox10, SNAI2 ] failed to show any candidate mutations to explain this complex cutaneous depigmentation phenotype.
The mice include splotch (Sp), microphthalmia (mi), Slugh-/-, WS4, JF1, lethal-spotting (ls), and Dominant megacolon (Dom).
The effect of ELL3 depletion on cell morphology, latent Epstein Barr Virus (EBV) lytic replication and differentiation markers in a Burkitt's lymphoma (BL) cell line cells are presented.
Burkitt's lymphoma and a sub-set of Diffuse Large B cell lymphoma cell lines abundantly express ELL3.
This article provides a comprehensive review of the syndromes and disorders associated with NTDs, including Pallister-Hall syndrome, Walker-Warburg syndrome and Fukuyama congenital muscular dystrophy, MURCS association, Roberts syndrome, cerebro-costo-mandibular syndrome, laterality sequences, hydrolethalus syndrome, Knobloch syndrome, oculoauriculovertebral spectrum (hemifacial microsomia), cervico-oculo-acoustic syndrome, Fanconi anemia, Miller-Dieker lissencephaly syndrome, Fraser syndrome, frontonasal dysplasia, Adams-Oliver syndrome, CHILD syndrome, dyssegmental dysplasia, and monozygotic twinning.
Moreover, the Etv5 mutation resulted in several developmental abnormalities including an increased incidence of embryonic and perinatal lethality, postnatal growth restriction, polydactyly and renal asymmetry.
Here, we show that conditional knockout of the FGF-activated transcription factor genes Etv4 and Etv5 in mouse led to ectopic Shh expression in the anterior limb bud and a preaxial polydactyly (PPD) skeletal phenotype.
Mechanistic studies showed that inducible expression of CD82 in highly metastatic melanoma cells significantly increased p21 expression upon binding of Duffy antigen receptor group (DARC), inducing tumor cell senescence and interrupting IL-8-mediated vascular endothelial (VE)-cadherin disassembly.
Our oneway ANOVA analysis results showed that in all cases from benign diseases to invasive carcinoma, the concentration of CXCL8, CXCR4 and CXCL12 was significantly different; in benign subgroups (benign change, benign change with proliferation, atypia), the concentration of CCL2 and CCR5 was significantly different; in invasive carcinoma cases, DARC concentration was significantly correlated with the relapse risk of patients.
177Lu-DOTATATE = lutetium octreotate; ACO = aconitase; Ad = adenine; AD = autosomal dominant; ATRX = ATRX chromatin remodeler; ccRCC = clear cell renal cell carcinoma; c-MYC = MYC proto oncognene; CoA = coenzyme A; COMT = catechol-O-methyl transferase; CPE = carboxypeptidase E; CS = citrate synthase; CT = computed tomography; DH = pyruvate dehydrogenase; DOTATATE = DOTA-octreotate; EGLN1/2 = egl-9 family hypoxia inducible factor 1/2; EGLN2/PHD1 = egl-9 family hypoxia inducible factor 2; elF-4E = eukaryotic initiation factor 4E; EMT = epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition; EPAS1/HIF2A = endothelial PAS domain protein 2/hypoxia-inducible factor 2Alfa; ERK = extracellular signal-regulated kinase; FH = fumarate hydroxylase; GSH = glutathione; H3F3A = histone 3.3 encoding gene; HIFs = Hypoxia-inducible factors; HIF-Alfa = hypoxia-inducible factor alpha; HNPGLs = head and neck paragangliomas; HRAS = HRas protooncogene; IDH = isocitrate dehydrogenase; IGF-1R = growth factor 1 receptor; KIF1B = kinesin family member 1B; MAX = myc-associated factor X; MDH2 = malate dehydrogenase; MN = metanephrine; MRI = magnetic resonance imaging; mTORC1 = mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1; MTY = methoxytyramine; NAd = nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide; NETs = neuroendocrine tumors; NF1 = neurofibromin 1; NMN = normetanephrine; OPLS-DA = orthogonal partial least square discriminant analysis; PFS = progression free survival; PHD = prolyl hydroxylase domain protein; PPGLs = Pheochromocytoma and Paragangliomas; PRRT = peptide receptor radionuclide therapy; Pvhl = von Hippel-Lindau protein; Raptor = regulatory associated protein of mTOR; RAS = rat sarcoma oncogene; RET = rearranged during transfection proto-oncogene; ROS = reactive oxygen species; S6K = S6 kinase; SDH = succinate dehydrogenase; SDHA, -B, -C, -D, = succinate dehydrogenase subunits A, B, C, D; SDHAF2 = succinate dehydrogenase complex assembly factor 2; SDHB, C, D = succinate dehydrogenase subunits B, C, D; SDHx = succinate dehydrogenase subunits; SSTRs = somatostatin receptors; SUCLG = succinyl-CoA synthase; TERRA = Telomeric Repeat-containing RNA; TET = ten-eleven-translocation methylcytosine dioxygenase; TMEM127 = transmembrane protein 127; VEGF = vascular endothelial growth factor; VHL = von Hippel-Lindau; Alfa-KGDH = alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase.
Immunohistochemistry for phosphorylated-S6, phosphorylated-mTOR, mTOR, phosphorylated-AKT, hypoxia inducible factor-1Alfa, Raptor, phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN), phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K), and phosphorylated 4E-binding protein-1 was performed on tissue microarray constructs of patients treated for nonmetastatic kidney cancer from 1997 to 2010.
Cholangiocarcinoma is a disease entity comprising diverse epithelial tumours with features of cholangiocyte differentiation: cholangiocarcinomas are categorized according to anatomical location as intrahepatic (iCCA), perihilar (pCCA), or distal (dCCA).
Cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) represents a diverse group of epithelial cancers associated with the biliary tract, and can best be stratified anatomically into intrahepatic (iCCA), perihilar (pCCA) and distal (dCCA) subsets.
Preoperative evaluation of vasculobiliary anatomy in the umbilical fissure (U-point) is pivotal for perihilar cholangiocarcinoma (PCCA) applied to right-sided hepatectomy.
This study sought to define the role of adjuvant radiation therapy (RT) for patients with curative intent resection of perihilar cholangiocarcinoma (pCCA).
Our goal was to characterize PD-L1 expression in intra-hepatic (iCCA) and perihilar (pCCA) cholangiocarcinomas, and to correlate our results with clinicopathological features, density of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) and PD-1 expression.A series of 58 iCCAs and 41 pCCAs was included in the study.
Liver transplantation (LT) provides a good chance of cure for selected patients with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and perihilar cholangiocarcinoma (pCCA).
BTC are sub-classified as intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (iCCA), perhilar/hilar cholangiocarcinoma (pCCA), distal cholangiocarcinoma (dCCA), and gallbladder carcinoma.
To evaluate prognostic factors for stent patency and survival in patients with perihilar cholangiocarcinoma (pCCA) who underwent percutaneous biliary stent placement.
Clinical data were collected and analyzed from 71 cases of primary nephrotic syndrome with glucocorticoid-induced ocular hypertension, glaucoma or cataract from Jun.
c-Jun, c-Jun N-terminal kinase(JNK) and endothelin B (ETB) receptor have been shown to contribute to the pathogenesis of glaucoma.
Ocular hypertension also caused upregulations in the iron-regulating protein ceruloplasmin, the anaerobic glycolytic enzyme lactate dehydrogenase, and the transcription factors cFos and p-cJun.
JUN is expressed after glaucoma-relevant injuries and Jun deficiency protects RGCs after mechanical injury to the optic nerve.
Here, we tested the importance of JNK-JUN signaling for RGC death after ocular hypertensive axonal injury in an age-related, mouse model of ocular hypertension.
JUN was expressed in a temporal and spatial pattern consistent with a role in glaucomatous injury.
To determine the importance of JUN in ocular hypertension-induced RGC death, a floxed allele of Jun and a retinal expressed cre recombinase (Six3-cre) were backcrossed onto the DBA/2J background.
Jun deficiency protected RGC somas from ocular hypertensive injury, but did not protect RGC axons from glaucomatous neurodegeneration.
Jun is a major regulator of RGC somal degeneration after glaucomatous ocular hypertensive injury.
These results suggest in glaucomatous neurodegeneration, JNK-JUN signaling has a major role as a pro-death signaling pathway between axonal injury and somal degeneration.
To our knowledge the co-existence of Pompe disease and thymic neuroendocrine tumor in the same patient has not been previously reported.
Significantly more A-C (block 2: rs230528-rs230521) haplotypes (P = 0.0003 after Bonferroni's corrections) and G-A-A (block 4: rs4648068-rs3774964-rs3774968) haplotypes (P = 0.021) were found in the patients with ovarian cancer.
The thyroid conditions for which surgery was indicated were: diffuse toxic goiter in 8 patients; multinodular toxic and nontoxic goiter in 30 patients; autonomous nodule in 2 patients; 2 patients with benign nodules at fine needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB); 4 patients with nodules positive for carcinoma at FNAB, among them 2 with unilateral cervical lymph nodes enlargement; 4 patients with highly suspect nodule on FNAB.
The aim of the present study was to comparatively investigate the effects of piroxicam, a selective COX-I inhibitor, and celecoxib, a selective COX-II inhibitor, on cognitive functions in an AlCl3-induced neurotoxicity mouse model to understand the specific role of each COX enzyme in the hippocampus and cortex.
Of these differentially expressed genes, we elected to further examine the increase in COX1 expression, because of data implicating energy utilization in METH neurotoxicity and the known role of COX1 in energy metabolism.
The precise role of COX1 and other genes in METH neurotoxicity remains to be elucidated.
Various genes involved in the control of cell proliferation and invasion (p16INK4A, RASSF1A, PTEN, Rap1GAP, TIMP3, DAPK, RARBeta2, E-cadherin, and CITED1) as well as genes specific of thyroid differentiation (Na+/I- symport, TSH receptor, pendrin, SL5A8, and TTF-1) present aberrant methylation in thyroid cancer.
Immunohistochemistry was performed using primary antibodies to cytokeratin 19, HBME1, and CITED1 that have been found to be useful in the diagnosis of thyroid carcinoma.
Markers such as HBME-1 and CITED1 can assist in separating some difficult cases of follicular variants of papillary thyroid carcinomas from follicular adenomas.
These analyses showed that several antibodies were useful in distinguishing follicular adenomas from follicular variant of papillary thyroid carcinomas including HBME-1, CITED1, galectin-3, cytokeratin 19, and S100A4 (p &lt; 0.0001).
A combination of markers consisting of a panel of HBME-1, galectin-3, and CK19 or a panel of HBME-1, CITED1, and galectin-3 was usually most effective in distinguishing follicular adenoma from follicular variant of papillary thyroid carcinoma.
We examined acetylcholinesterase, plasma neuronal proteins, secreted beta-amyloid precursor protein (APP), and amyloid-beta 40 and amyloid-beta 42 peptides in children with and without autism.
The growth associated protein 43-positive fibres also seemed to be less in six samples of club foot.
Here we showed that miR-342-5p and miR-608 suppressed the tumorigenesis of colon cancer cells in vitro and in vivo by targeting NAA10 mRNA for degradation.
Our results implicate miR-342-5p and miR-608 in colon cancer development and unveil the underlying mechanism of this phenomenon, which involves NAA10.
We demonstrated the clinical relevance of the miRNAs and identified miR-342-5p and miR-744* as significantly down-regulated in HER2-positive breast tumors as compared to HER2-negative tumors from two cohorts of breast cancer patients (101 and 1302 cases).
Furthermore, higher expression of miR-342-5p was associated with better survival in both breast cancer patient cohorts.
Compromised CN function is a significant cause of erectile dysfunction development following prostatectomy and serves as the primary target for potential neuroprotective or regenerative strategies utilizing NGFs such as BDNF, GDF-5, and NTN, and/or targeted novel therapeutics modulating signaling pathways.
The manifestation of LHON was associated with increased mortality and increased incidence of several disorders including stroke, demyelinating disorder, dementia, and epilepsy.
Leber's Hereditary Optic Neuropathy (LHON) shares features with Multiple Sclerosis (MS).
Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON) is a mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) associated neurodegenerative disorder of retinal ganglion cells.
MT-ND4: mitochondrially encoded NADH dehydrogenase 4; MT-TL1: mitochondrially encoded tRNA leucine 1 (UUA/G); PCR: polymerase chain reaction; OXPHOS: mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation; ATP: adenosine triphosphate; mtDNA: mitochondrial DNA; SNPs: single nucleotide substitutions; AD: alzheimer's disease; PD: parkinson's disease; MELAS: mitochondrial encephalomyopathy with lactic acidosis and stroke-like episodes; ROS: reactive oxygen species.
Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON) co-occuring with multiple sclerosis-like disease (LHON-MS) is suggested to be a separate disease entity denoted Harding's disease.
The role of oxidative stress in the five most common inherited mitochondrial diseases, Friedreich ataxia, LHON, MELAS, MERRF, and Leigh syndrome (LS), is discussed.
Of the five most common mitochondrial diseases, the strongest support for oxidative stress is for Friedreich ataxia (6.42%), followed by LHON (2.45%), MELAS (2.18%), MERRF (1.71%), and LS (1.03%).
Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON) and a multiple sclerosis (MS)-like illness appear to coexist 50 times more frequently than would be expected by chance.
Mutations in the retinitis pigmentosa 1 (RP1) gene are a common cause of retinitis pigmentosa (RP).
Furthermore, these findings indicate that the RP1 form of inherited retinal degeneration is part of the larger class of neurodegenerative diseases caused by MAP dysfunction.
Our objective was to determine the ethical options of Paediatric Intensive Care Unit (PICU) paediatricians as regards a child with SMA-1 and respiratory failure.
Faced with child with SMA-1 and respiratory failure, most paediatricians are in favour of initiating NIV and LET when such support is insufficient, but they would accept the family's decision, even in case of disagreement.
A scenario of acute respiratory failure in an infant with SMA-1 has been included in a training program using advanced simulation for Primary Care pediatricians (PCP).
When faced with a simulated SMA-1 infant with respiratory failure, PCP have difficulties in interacting with the family, and to involve it in the decision making process.
TREX1 acts in concert with the SET complex in granzyme A-mediated apoptosis, and mutations in TREX1 cause Aicardi-Goutieres syndrome and familial chilblain lupus.
Lymphoblastoid cells carrying the D18N mutation are significantly less sensitive to granzyme A-mediated cell death, suggesting a novel role for this caspase-independent form of apoptosis in the pathogenesis of familial chilblain lupus.
A recent article explored protective modifiers, including plastin 3 (PLS3) and coronin 1C (CORO1C), in spinal muscular atrophy (SMA).
However, the expression of CYP26C1, another CYP26 family member, in primary breast carcinoma remains to be clarified.
In the present study, we examined the expression of CYP26C1 by immunohistochemistry, using three different types of microarray, and observed strong cytoplasmic staining of CYP26C1 in 73 of the 219 (33.3 %) breast carcinomas.
In addition, CYP26C1 positivity was independent of the expression status of the hormone receptors and immunohistochemical surrogates for the intrinsic subtypes of breast cancer.
This report is the first to demonstrate elevated expression of CYP26C1 in primary breast carcinomas.
In the present study we chose to investigate 7 genes involved in the synthesis, degradation and transportation of RA, ALDH1A1, ALDH1A2, ALDH1A3, CYP26A1, CYP26B1, CYP26C1 and Transthyretin (TTR), for their roles in the development of schizophrenia.
The index of low SIRT1 and high MMP2 respectively correlated with patients history of MI (p=0.3, p=0.01) and marginally with presence or history of atrial fibrillation (AF) (p=0.213, p=0.076).
BACKGROUND To examine changes of mRNA and protein expressions of MMP-2, Bcl-2, and BAX in atrial fibrillation (AF) patients, and investigate the correlations among these 3 biomarkers.
In conclusion, disruption of Kcnj16 induces a severe renal phenotype that, apart from hypokalemia, is the opposite of the phenotype seen in SeSAME/EAST syndrome.
We investigated the localization of KCNJ10 and the homologous KCNJ16 in kidney and the functional consequences of KCNJ10 mutations found in our patients with EAST syndrome.
Toxin C13S1C1 was also cytotoxic against breast adenocarcinoma MDA-MB-231 cells (LC50 = 62+/-2myg/ml) and colorectal adenocarcinoma HT-29 cells (LC50 = 110+/-4myg/ml).
We report an unusual case of invasive papillary carcinoma of the breast with high nuclear grade, brisk mitosis, necrosis, extensive apocrine differentiation, and intense lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate; additionally triple-negativity for estrogen and progesterone receptors and Her2 neu.
Moreover, Sec24bY613 genetically interacts with a loss-of-function Vangl2 allele (Vangl2LP), causing a marked increase in the prevalence of spina bifida.
The overall goal of TASK2 of the AES/ILAE Translational Task Force is to organize and coordinate systematic reviews on selected topics regarding animal research in epilepsy.
K2P 5.1 channels (also called TASK-2 or Kcnk5) have already been shown to be relevant in the pathophysiology of autoimmune disease because they are known to be upregulated on peripheral and central T lymphocytes of multiple sclerosis (MS) patients.
Recent studies have indicated the impact of K2P5.1 upregulation in T lymphocytes on the pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis and multiple sclerosis.
So far KCNK5 has been described to be up-regulated in T cells in multiple sclerosis patients and to be implicated in the volume regulatory mechanism regulatory volume decrease (RVD) in T cells.
Recent studies highlighted the potential role of the K2P5.1 K(+) channel in the pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis and multiple sclerosis.
Expression levels of K2P5.1 (TASK2; KCNK5) channels belonging to the family of two-pore domain potassium channels have previously been correlated to the activity of autoreactive T lymphocytes in patients with multiple sclerosis and rheumatoid arthritis.
Thus, we evaluated the effect of serum availability on the expression of commonly used HKG (ACTB, B2M, GAPDH, GUSB, HPRT1, IPO8, MRPL19, PGK1, PPIA, RPLP0, RPS23, SDHA, TBP, UBC, and YWHAZ) in seven colon adenocarcinoma cell lines (Caco-2, DLD-1, HCT116, HT29, Lovo, SW480, and SW620).
We investigated whether the expression of PGK1 varies between metastatic and non-metastatic colon cancer.
We compared PGK1 expression in colon cancer patients either with or without metastasis via polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and immunohistochemistry.
PCR results showed an increased expression of PGK1 in colon cancer tissue from metastatic patients in comparison to patients with no metastasis (fold change 2.6, p&lt;0.001).
The results indicate that increased expression of PGK1 in colon cancer tissue is associated with metastasis.
TYMS and PGK1, as well as their epitope peptides, might be appropriate target molecules for specific immunotherapy of HLA-A2(+) colon cancer patients because of the positive role of TYMS and PGK1 in chemoresistance (5-fluorouracil) and angiogenesis of tumor cells, respectively.
In one sample we sequenced 7231 contiguous base pairs that covered completely the region from the 5'end of the 16S rRNA gene to the 5'end of the 23S rRNA gene comprising the whole 16S rRNA (rrs), and the following genes: Ala tRNA (alaT), Ile tRNA (ileT), adenylosuccinate lyase (purB), adenylosuccinate synthetase (purA), methylpurine-DNA glycosylase (mag), hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase (hpt), an hydrolase (HAD superfamily) and a 135 bp 5' fragment of the 23S rRNA (rrlA) genes.
Additionally, NOLC1 expression was decreased in human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) tissue, and the ectopic expression of NOLC1 repressed the proliferation of HCC cells and tumor growth in a HCC xenograft model.
CUL3(KBTBD8) monoubiquitylates NOLC1 and its paralogue TCOF1, the mutation of which underlies the neurocristopathy Treacher Collins syndrome.
Treacher Collins syndrome (TCS), a representative human ribosomopathy with craniofacial abnormalities, is attributed to mutations in the tcof1 gene that has a homologous gene called nopp140.
Previous studies suggest that NOLC1 is crucial for normal cell growth, and plays a role in the regulation of tumorigenesis of nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) and demonstrate that both NOLC1 and tumor protein 53 work synergistically to activate the MDM2 promoter in NPC cells.
Yet, the functioning of NOLC1 in liver cancer remains unknown.
In this study, we showed that NOLC1 was silenced or downregulated in liver tumor tissues when compared with that in the matched non-cancer tissues.
Low expression of NOLC1 in hepatoma cell lines and liver cancer tissues was associated with cyclin D3.
In conclusion, our study demonstrated that DNA methylation is a key mechanism of silenced NOLC1 expression in human hepatocellular carcinoma cells, and NOLC1 gene hypermethylation of the four CpG dinucleotides is a potential biomarker for hepatocellular carcinoma.
Severe combined immunodeficiency mice bearing NPC xenografts derived from NOLC1-short hairpin-RNA-transfected animals were found to have 82% lower levels of tumor growth than control mice as well as marked tumor cell apoptosis.
The aim of the study was to examine the effects of endurance exercise on circulating vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (sVCAM-1) and intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (sICAM-1) in sickle cell trait (SCT) athletes with or without alpha-thalassemia.
The aim of the study was to examine the effects of exercise on soluble vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (sVCAM-1) and intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (sICAM-1) in sickle cell trait (SCT) athletes with or without alpha-thalassemia.
As compared to normal, increased sICAM-1 was found in beta-thal/HbE patients with non-splenectomy; BE-NS (p = 0.002), increased ELAM-1 in beta-thal/HbE patients with splenectomy; BE-S (p = 0.01) and HbH with Hb Constant Spring; HbH/CS (p = 0.001), and increased sVCAM-1 in BE-NS; (p = &lt; 0.0001) and BE-S (p = 0.002).
Furthermore, treatment with AST or DEX significantly suppressed the mRNA and protein expression levels of the transcription factor GATA-3 and retinoic acid receptor-related orphan nuclear receptor (ROR)Gammat in tissue samples isolated from the spleen and nasal mucosa of mice with allergic rhinitis.
The present results suggested that treatment with AST may attenuate OVA-induced allergic rhinitis via regulating the expression of the transcription factors GATA-3, RORGammat, T-bet and Foxp3, which commit T helper cells to the Th1 phenotype.
Canagliflozin was associated with a low incidence of hypoglycemia when used with background AHAs that are not associated with hypoglycemia; the incidence was higher among patients on background AHAs associated with hypoglycemia (i.e.
Canagliflozin was associated with a low incidence of hypoglycemia when not used in conjunction with AHAs associated with hypoglycemia (i.e., insulin or sulfonylurea).
Adding different AHAs to metformin was associated with varying effects on HbA1c, BW, SBP, hypoglycemia, UTI and GTI which should impact clinician choice when selecting adjunctive therapy.
It has been shown at least four mutations of mitochondrial genome, namely, A1555G in MT-RNR1 gene, C3256T in MT-TL1 gene, G12315A in MT-TL2 gene, and G15059A in MT-CYB gene have significantly higher prevalence and mean value in lipofibrous plaques as compared to non-atherosclerotic intima, and therefore are associated with atherosclerosis.
Ten mitochondrial mutations belonging to mitochondrial genes MT-RNR1 (rRNA 12S); MT-TL1 (tRNA-Leu, recognizes UUR); MT-TL2 (tRNA-Leu, recognizes CUN); MT-ND1, MT-ND2, MT-ND5, and MT-ND6 (subunits 1, 2, 5, and 6, respectively, of NADH dehydrogenase); and MT-CYB (cytochrome b) were potentially associated with atherosclerosis.
The vectors of chikungunya and dengue virus, Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus, the vector of lymphatic filariasis, Culex quinquefasciatus, and that of Japanese encephalitis, Culex tritaeniorhynchus, were found from 70 to 2,000 m asl in eastern Nepal.
The results of an examination of a paraffin block histopathology specimen by fluorescence in-situ hybridization (FISH) showed no mucosa associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma translocation gene 1 (MALT1) (18q21.1), B-cell lymphoma 2 (BCL2) (18q21.3), or BCL6 (3q27) split signals in either the uterus or the greater omentum, however, trisomy 18 was detected in approximately 50%-70% of the tumor cells in both the uterus and the greater omentum.
The following abnormalities were most frequently observed: rearrangements involving 14q32, 19q13, 19p13, 1p, 3q27, and 8q24; del(6q); dup(1q); and trisomy 18.
Passive avoidance test showed four Group rats shuttle times were 6.8+/-0.6, 1.2+/-0.2, 5.4+/-0.5, 3.6+/-0.3, incubation period were 26.1+/-3.9, 152.2+/-12.9, 65.8+/-7.0, 91.2+/-9.1, and water maze test had the same trend, with values in epilepsy groups significantly lower than the normal group of rats, which meant cognitive dysfunction.The above results also showed Baclofen further inhibited the learning and memory ability of the rats and CGP35348 promoted the learning and memory ability.The results of the Arc/Arg3.1 and GB1, GB2 level detection showed that epilepsy groups had significantly higher expression levels of Arc/Arg3.1 and GB1, GB2 than the normal group.Comparison among epilepsy groups showed that Baclofen group expressed lower levels of Arc/Arg3.1 and expressed higher levels of GB1, GB2, however CGP35348 group expressed higher levels of Arc/Arg3.1 and expressed lower levels of GB1, GB2.
To search for the mechanism causing clinically silent corticotroph adenoma, we immunohistochemically examined the expression of prohormone convertase 1/3 (PC1/3) in this type of adenoma and compared our results with those obtained for Cushing's disease.
In the present study, we tested the therapeutic and immunomodulatory effects of FTS and its derivative 5-fluoro-FTS (F-FTS) in the rat adjuvant-induced arthritis model (AIA).
MR features were scored (0-3) following the Oslo hand OA score: BMLs, synovitis, cysts, flexor tenosynovitis (FTS).
BMLs, synovitis, cysts, FTS and ETI were demonstrated in 56%, 90%, 22%, 16% and 30% of patients, respectively.
BMLs (grade 2/3 vs 0: 3.5 (1.6-7.7)) and synovitis (3 vs 0: OR 3.6 (95% CI 1.9-6.6)) were severity-dependent associated with joint pain, but FTS and ETI were not.
Infectious flexor tenosynovitis (FTS) is a serious infection of the hand and wrist that can lead to necrosis and amputation without prompt diagnosis and surgical debridement.
Our objective in this work was to investigate the anti-inflammatory effects of the Ras inhibitor farnesylthiosalicylic acid (FTS) on adjuvant-induced arthritis (AIA) in rats, an experimental model for RA.
Diabetic patients are susceptible to stenosing flexor tenosynovitis (FTS) and may have a diminished response to treatment.
With the rising participation of women in sports events, the prevalence of eating disorders and the female athlete triad (FTS), a syndrome of disordered eating, amenorrhea, and osteoporosis, have also increased in recent years.
Dupuytren's contracture (DC) (42 vs. 29.3%, respectively; P=0.01), limited joint mobility (LJM) (39 vs. 28.5%, respectively; P=0.01) and carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS) (5.3 vs. 1%, respectively; P=0.01) were significantly higher in T2DM patients than in the controls, but not stenosing flexor tenosynovitis (FTS, 'trigger finger').
Data from several studies suggest that the gastrin family of growth factors potentiates colorectal cancer tumourigenesis.
The aim of this study was to investigate whether progastrin expression may predict clinical outcome in colorectal cancer.
This is the first study to show that progastrin expression may be predictive of aggressive tumour behaviour in patients with colorectal cancer and supports its clinical relevance and potential use as a biomarker.
The aim of this study was to analyze plasma concentrations of enterohormones (motilin, ghrelin, gastrin and pancreatic polypeptide) and to verify if their abnormal levels may contribute to the severity of dyspeptic symptoms in colorectal cancer patients.
This study examined the expression level, subcellular localization, and binding activity of CacyBP/SIP in human colon cancer cells in the presence and absence of the hormone gastrin.
CacyBP/SIP promoted the cell proliferation of colon cancer cells under both basal and gastrin stimulated conditions as shown by knockdown studies.
As treatment with proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) increases the biosynthesis and secretion of gastrin, it has been postulated that treatment with PPIs could increase the risk of cancer, especially in Barrett's esophagus, gastric carcinoids, and colorectal cancer (CRC).
Pathological studies showed lymph nodes metastasis in 2 patients with pancreatic gastrinomas, and in one patient with duodenal gastrinoma.
A progressive increase in the expression of PD-1 and B7-H1/B7-DC on T cells and APC, respectively, was observed in the pancreatic lymph nodes of female non-obese diabetic (NOD) mice as they developed diabetes.
B7-H1 and B7-DC have negative regulatory effects upon binding PD-1 on activated T cells and B7-H1 deficiency increases severity of both diabetes and EAE.
These characteristics have implicated KIR3DL2 in several pathologies: ankylosing spondylitis and cutaneous T-cell lymphomas such as Sezary syndrome, CD30+ cutaneous lymphoma, and transformed mycosis fungoides.
KIR3DL2, an inhibitory receptor expressed by natural killer cells and a subset of normal CD8(+) T cells, is aberrantly expressed in neoplastic cells in transformed mycosis fungoides and Sezary syndrome.
Not only we confirmed the expression of this marker in the blood and/or skin of mycosis fungoides patients but we also show for the first time CD158k expression (often associated with CD160) on cutaneous CD4+ T cells from healthy individuals (25.3 +/- 15%).
Therefore, CD4+ CD160+ T cells expressing CD158k might represent specialized cutaneous lymphocytes devoted to immune surveillance, from which could originate cutaneous T-cell lymphomas such as mycosis fungoides.
p140/KIR3DL2 has been identified in malignant cell lines isolated from the skin and blood of patients with transformed mycosis fungoides (MF) and Sezary's syndrome (SS).
Chromosomal aberration (DS especially) are among the most frequent prenatally diagnosed birth defects, further being heart defects, neural tube defects (anencephaly, encephalocele, spina bifida), hydrocephalus, congenital skeletal system defects, abdominal wall defects (omphalocele, gastroschisis) and renal defects.
In some defects, prenatal diagnostics has also significantly influenced their incidence in births (anencephaly, gastroschisis and DS e.g.
The Fxn KO/Mck model reproduces some key features of patients with Friedreich ataxia and provides an opportunity of ameliorating their symptoms with experimental therapies.
Further confirmation is obtained with identification of two mutations in the ARSB gene for MPS VI or mutations in the GALNS gene for MPS IVA.We report slowly progressing patients, one with MPS VI and two with MPS IVA, who presented with skeletal changes and hip findings resembling Legg-Calve-Perthes disease or spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia and normal/near normal urine GAG levels.
We identified genes that might be truly causative, but GWAS might have failed to identify for 148 out of the GWAS-identified SNPs; for example, TUFM (P = 3.3E-48) was identified for inflammatory bowel disease (early onset); ZFP90 (P = 4.4E-34) for ulcerative colitis; and IDUA (P = 2.2E-11) for Parkinson's disease.
Apart from allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA) and mould-caused mycoses, only sufficient evidence for an association between moisture/mould damage and the following health effects has been established: allergic respiratory disease, asthma (manifestation, progression and exacerbation), allergic rhinitis, hypersensitivity pneumonitis (extrinsic allergic alveolitis), and increased likelihood of respiratory infections/bronchitis.
We studied the relationship between GORD and allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA), chronic pulmonary aspergillosis (CPA), or Aspergillus bronchitis.
We reviewed four patients referred with elevated Aspergillus serology markers and marked pulmonary symptoms for ABPA, CPA, and Aspergillus bronchitis, and discussed the underlying pathophysiological relationship with GORD.
Data were collected retrospectively from medical records included age, gender, predisposing factors for ABPA, chronic pulmonary aspergillosis, or Aspergillus bronchitis; presence of nocturnal reflux, nausea, epigastric pain, Medical Research Council dyspnea scale score, pH manometry data, endoscopic results (ulcers, Barrett's esophagus), treatment of GORD [proton-pump inhibitors (PPIs), surgical operation]; history of smoking, alcohol consumption; concomitant COPD; serological markers (anti-Aspergillus IgG, anti-Aspergillus IgE), and antifungal treatment.
One had ABPA, one CPA, and two had Aspergillus bronchitis; median age was 57 years [range 39-71]; males-to-females ratio was 1:3.
Apart from the allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA) and the mycoses caused by mold, there is only sufficient evidence for the following associations between moisture/mold damages and different health effects: Allergic respiratory diseases, asthma (manifestation, progression, exacerbation), allergic rhinitis, exogenous allergic alveolitis and respiratory tract infections/bronchitis.
can lead to allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA), Aspergillus sensitisation and Aspergillus bronchitis in CF.
Published proportions of ABPA (17.7%), Aspergillus sensitisation (14.6%) and Aspergillus bronchitis (30%) in CF were applied to those &gt;18 years and compared with notified ABPA cases.
Aspergillus sensitisation, associated with increased bronchiectasis and reduced FEV1, affects an anticipated 5,506 patients without ABPA or Aspergillus bronchitis.
Together ABPA and Aspergillus bronchitis are estimated to affect 17,989 adults, 47.7% of the adult CF population.
Itraconazole is prescribed for allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA) or Aspergillus bronchitis in CF subjects.
We selected an average of five serum samples from each of the 17 patients with ABPA (13 proven and 4 probable ABPA) and from 3 patients with Aspergillus bronchitis and rhinosinusitis.
Patients were diagnosed with ABPA and Aspergillus bronchitis related to innate immune defects.
Yeasts and filamentous fungi are beginning to emerge as significant microbial pathogens in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF), particularly in relation to allergic-type responses, as seen in patients with allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA), Aspergillus bronchitis and in invasive fungal disease in lung transplant patients.
On the other hand, a widespread positive reaction for CK 5/8, CK 7, CK 19, and negative reaction for CK 10, was a helpful feature in the differentiation of Paget's disease from Bowen's disease and BAK.
To date, the relation between serum leptin levels of dialysis patients and renal osteodystrophy, defined by histomorphometric and histodynamic parameters of bone, has not been studied.
For 100 years, it has been obvious that Salmonella enterica strains sharing the serotype with the formula 1,4,[5],12:b:1,2-now known as Paratyphi B-can cause diseases ranging from serious systemic infections to self-limiting gastroenteritis.
Interestingly, in the case of breast cancer patients, this phenomenon correlated with high expression level of several molecular chaperones belonging to the HSPA, DNAJB and HSPC families.
Unexpectedly, conditioning before HSPC infusion was required to protect the mice from lymphoma developing when transplanting small numbers of progenitors.
Here, we evaluated the potency of highly active NK cells derived from human CD34+ haematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPC) to infiltrate and mediate killing of human ovarian cancer spheroids using an in vivo-like model system and mouse xenograft model.
These CD56+Perforin+ HSPC-NK cells were generated under stroma-free conditions in the presence of StemRegenin-1, IL-15, and IL-12, and exerted efficient cytolytic activity and IFNGamma production toward ovarian cancer monolayer cultures.
Live-imaging confocal microscopy demonstrated that these HSPC-NK cells actively migrate, infiltrate, and mediate tumor cell killing in a three-dimensional multicellular ovarian cancer spheroid.
Furthermore, intraperitoneal HSPC-NK cell infusions in NOD/SCID-IL2RGammanull (NSG) mice bearing ovarian carcinoma significantly reduced tumor progression.
These findings demonstrate that highly functional HSPC-NK cells efficiently destruct ovarian carcinoma spheroids in vitro and kill intraperitoneal ovarian tumors in vivo, providing great promise for effective immunotherapy through intraperitoneal HSPC-NK cell adoptive transfer in ovarian carcinoma patients.
Treatment with vitamin C, a co-factor of Fe2+ and Alfa-KG-dependent dioxygenases, mimics TET2 restoration by enhancing 5-hydroxymethylcytosine formation in Tet2-deficient mouse HSPCs and suppresses human leukemic colony formation and leukemia progression of primary human leukemia PDXs.
We quantified extracellular IL-16 protein (ELISA) and intracellular IL-16 in NK cells, T-cells, B-cells, and monocytes (flow cytometry) in blood samples from long-term tobacco smokers with and without chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and in never-smokers.
In asthmatic children with positive ETC, monocyte hemotactic protein-1 (MCP-1) and IL-16 adjusted to pre-EBC forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) were significantly higher compared to children with negative ETC (p = 0.022 and p = 0.017 respectively).
Compared with the control group, silica dust exposed group, the observation group of objects, the pneumosilicosis patients of IL-16 in induced sputum IL-16 (21.40 +/- 9.24) decreased, the content of PDGF [(5.96 +/- 0.51) ng/L], MMP-2 [(447.86 +/- 27.10) ng/L], MMP-9 [(223.91 +/- 12.28) ng/L], MCP-1 [(122.87 +/- 6.08) ng/L] increased, the differences are statistically significant (P &lt; 0.05).
As silicosis biomarkers, TNF-alpha, TGF-beta, IL-16, PDGF, MMP-2, MMP-9 and MCP-1 have certain significance, further suggesting that early detection rate of patients with silicosis can be improved by employing the multiple indexes discriminate equation.
By contrast, compared to eosinophil-normal asthma (eosinophils&lt;=0.3%), eosinophil-high asthma (eosinophils&gt;0.3%) had higher levels of IL-5, IL-13, IL-16, and PDGF-bb, but same neutrophil percentage, IL-8, and FEV1.
Here, we demonstrate that DRG1 is elevated in lung adenocarcinomas while weakly expressed in adjacent lung tissues.
To this end, we describe the identification of developmentally regulated GTP-binding protein 1 (DRG-1) as a melanoma-associated antigen recognized by HLA-DR11-restricted CD4(+) Th1 cells.
Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction revealed that DRG-1 was highly expressed in melanoma cell lines but not in normal tissues.
DRG-1 knockdown by lentiviral-based shRNA suppressed melanoma cell proliferation and soft agar colony formation.
Taken together, these data suggest that DRG-1 plays an important role in melanoma cell growth and transformation, indicating that DRG1 may represent a novel target for CD4(+) T cell-mediated immunotherapy in melanoma.
FBXW7 mRNA was identified as a direct target of miR-155 in glioma.
Finally, we found that MALAT1 positively regulated FBXW7 expression, which was responsible for glioma progression mediated by MALAT1-miR-155 pathway.
Besides those, Fbxw7 activity is controlled at different levels, resulting in specific and tunable regulation of the abundance and activity of its substrates in a variety of human solid tumor types, including glioma malignancy, nasopharyngeal carcinoma, osteosarcoma, melanoma as well as colorectal, lung, breast, gastric, liver, pancreatic, renal, prostate, endometrial, and esophageal cancers.
Subsequently, miR-15/16 activities are reduced and many of their direct targets are de-repressed, including ubiquitin ligase FBXW7 that destabilizes Cyclin E. Conversely, GBM cells expressing low p21 level, or after p21 knock-down, exhibit weaker or no E2F1 response to miR-10b inhibition.
Notch pathway genes are overexpressed in ependymomas and gliomas along with FBXW7 downregulation.
We propose that p53 mutations contribute to gliomagenesis by both allowing the overexpression of c-Myc through downregulation of Fbxw7 and by protecting against c-Myc-induced apoptosis.
PMD is located adjacent and medial to the nucleus prepositus hypoglossi (PH) in the dorsal medulla and is distinguished by the pattern of immunoreactivity of cells and fibers to several markers including calcium-binding proteins, a synthetic enzyme for nitric oxide (neuronal nitric oxide synthase, nNOS) and a nonphosphorylated neurofilament protein (antibody SMI-32).
Cells in PMD are also immunoreactive to nNOS, and immunoreactivity to a neurofilament protein shows many labeled cells and fibers.
Regardless of the type of surgery (PRE-OP, POS-OP1, POS-OP2), the prevalence of periodontitis proved to be high (81.45%).
There was a statistically significant difference in the prevalence of periodontitis among the PRE-OP, POS-OP1, and POS-OP2 groups (P = 0.040).
Long-term studies with gamma-irradiated 0.5 and 2.5mg hOP-1 per gram of xenogeneic bovine collagenous matrix induce the restitutio ad integrum of the periodontal tissues in furcation defects exposed by chronic periodontitis in P. ursinus.
Bone morphogenetic protein-7 (BMP 7) induces cementogenesis in periodontitis-associated periodontal ligament (PDL) defects.
Both KRT19 and ANXA8 mRNA may be useful markers for detecting lymph node metastases in OSCC patients.
The clinical data of 98 cases of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), kirsten rat sarcoma viral oncogene (KRAS), V-rafmurine sarcoma viral oncogene homolog B1 (BRAF)-negative patients with advanced lung adenocarcinoma patients who diagnosed by histopathology from January 2015 to April 2016 in the First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University were collected.
#背#景#与#目#的 #间#变#性#淋#巴#瘤#激#酶 (anaplastic lymphoma kinase, ALK) #是#非#小#细#胞#肺#癌 (non-small cell lung cancer, NSCLC) #的#重#要#驱#动#基#因#之#一, #多#项#研#究#显#示#培#美#曲#塞#在ALK#阳#性#肺#癌#中#的#疗#效#存#在#争#议#。#本#研#究#旨#在#继#续#探#索#以#培#美#曲#塞#为#基#础#的#化#疗#在ALK#阳#性#和#阴#性#肺#腺#癌#患#者#中#的#疗#效#。#方#法 #回#顾#性#分#析#郑#州#大#学#第#一#附#属#医#院2015#年1#月-2016#年4#月#经#组#织#病#理#学#证#实#的98#例#表#皮#生#长#因#子#受#体 (epidermal growth factor receptor, EGFR) #、#鼠#类#肉#瘤#病#毒#癌#基#因 (kirsten rat sarcoma viral oncogene, KRAS) #、#鼠#类#肉#瘤#滤#过#性#毒#菌#致#癌#同#源#体B1 (V-rafmurine sarcoma viral oncogene homolog B1, BRAF) #均#为#阴#性#的#晚#期#肺#腺#癌#患#者#的#临#床#资#料#。#分#析ALK#基#因#状#态#、#临#床#特#征#、#化#疗#疗#效#及#无#疾#病#进#展#生#存#期 (progression-free survival, PFS) #之#间#的#关#系#。#结#果 98#例#患#者#均#进#行#了ALK#基#因#检#测, ALK#基#因#断#裂#融#合34#例 (34.7%) , #未#发#生#断#裂#融#合64#例 (65.3%) #。#全#部#患#者#均#接#受#一#线#培#美#曲#塞#联#合#铂#类#的#化#疗, #客#观#缓#解#率 (objective response rate, ORR) #为21.4%, #疾#病#控#制#率 (disease control rate, DCR) #为84.7%#。ALK#阳#性#肺#腺#癌#患#者#的ORR#和DCR#均#高#于#阴#性#患#者 (41.2% vs 10.9%, X2=23.389, P&lt;0.001; 91.2% vs 81.3%, X2=4.153, P=0.042) , #差#异#有#统#计#学#意#义#。ALK#基#因#状#态#与#年#龄#、#性#别#、#吸#烟#史#、#临#床#分#期#均#无#明#显#关#系#。ALK#阳#性#肺#腺#癌#的#中#位PFS#为7.1#个#月 (95%CI: 6.1-8.1) , #阴#性4.7#个#月 (95%CI: 3.818-5.582) , #二#者#的PFS#差#异#有#统#计#学#意#义 (X2=13.269, P&lt;0.001) #。Cox#回#归#多#因#素#分#析#显#示#：#培#美#曲#塞#联#合#铂#类#化#疗#的PFS#与#性#别#、#年#龄#、#吸#烟#、#分#期#、#与#铂#类#药#物#的#种#类#均#无#明#显#关#系, ALK#基#因#断#裂#融#合#是PFS#相#关#的#唯#一#变#量 (HR=0.392, 95%CI: 0.243-0.634, P&lt;0.001) #。#结#论 ALK#阳#性#相#比ALK#阴#性#肺#腺#癌#患#者#一#线#应#用#以#培#美#曲#塞#为#基#础#的#化#疗#有#更#大#的#临#床#获#益#。.
None of the NF1 glioblastomas harbored isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 (IDH1) gene mutation, v-RAF murine sarcoma viral oncogene homolog B1 (BRAF) gene mutation, and telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT) gene promoter mutation.
Somatic v-Raf murine sarcoma viral oncogene homolog B (BRAF) mutation, present in approximately 10% of metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC) cases, is associated with poor prognosis.
All colorectal cancer patients tested for BRAF mutation, from October 2010 to November 2014 were identified.
We highlight common mechanistic themes underpinning resistance to targeted therapies that are shared by NSCLC subtypes, including those with oncogenic alterations in epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK), ROS1 proto-oncogene receptor tyrosine kinase (ROS1), serine/threonine-protein kinase b-raf (BRAF) and other less established oncoproteins.
Here, we investigated the response of normal human keratinocytes to the MEK inhibitors trametinib and cobimetinib, alone and in combination with the v-Raf murine sarcoma viral oncogene homolog B (BRAF) inhibitors dabrafenib and vemurafenib, in terms of signal transduction and de novo gene expression.
The prognostic role of the V600E mutation of v-raf murine sarcoma viral oncogene homolog B1 (BRAF) in metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC) is well established, but the therapeutic regimen targeting this disease is lacking.
Kirsten rat sarcoma viral oncogene homolog (KRAS), neuroblastoma RAS viral oncogene homolog (NRAS), and BRAF mutational status was assayed using direct sequencing.
We performed an unbiased CRISPR-Cas9 knockout screen on melanoma cells that were both resistant and addicted to inhibition of the serine/threonine-protein kinase BRAF, in order to functionally mine their genome for 'addiction genes'.
In patients with melanoma that had progressed during treatment with a BRAF inhibitor, treatment cessation was followed by increased expression of the receptor tyrosine kinase AXL, which is associated with the phenotype switch.
v-raf murine sarcoma viral oncogene homolog B1 (BRAF)-mutant anaplastic xanthoastrocytomas and gangliogliomas may benefit from BRAF and mitogen-activated protein kinase inhibitors.
Mutations in the proto-oncogene B-raf (BRAF) occur in approximately 3% of NSCLC cases.
To our knowledge, this is only the second well-documented case of gastrointestinal metastasis from BRAF-mutated lung cancer.
For example, "Mongolism" was changed to Down's syndrome; "Australia" antigen to HBsAg; "Mexican" Swine flu to H1N1; "GRID" (Gay Related Immune Deficiency) and 4H-Disease (Haitians, Homosexuals, Haemophiliacs and Heroin Users Disease) to AIDS.
WHEN IT WAS CALLED 'GRID': One year ago today, I told my colleagues that I was dying of AIDS.
APL are significantly influenced by azole dose, age, cystic fibrosis, type of LTx, and comedication with proton-pump inhibitors.
DMSG = DutchMEN1 Study Group; D-NET = duodenal neuroendocrine tumor; DP-NET = duodenopancreatic neuroendocrine tumor; HPF = high-power field; Ki67 LI = Ki67 labeling index; MEN1 = multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1; NET = neuroendocrine tumor; OS = overall survival; P-NET = pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor; PPI = proton pump inhibitor; ULN = upper limit of normal; WHO = World Health Organization.
APL are significantly influenced by azole dose, age, cystic fibrosis, type of LTx, and co-medication with proton-pump inhibitors.
In both cases, the diagnosis of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 was made after proton pump therapy was discontinued.
Clinical assessment for features of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (eg, serum calcium levels, personal and family history of hypercalcemia, pituitary or pancreatic tumors) could identify patients with higher risk for a tumoral source of hypergastrinemia where imaging studies can help support the diagnosis without the potential side effects of abrupt discontinuation of proton pump inhibitor therapy.
No correlation was detected between Ki-67 values of HGPs in CLD patients and the presence of portal hypertension, infection with Helicobacter pylori, or proton pump inhibitor use.
Mutation screening and phenotypic profiling of 2 amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-(ALS) and frontotemporal dementia-(FTD) associated genes, CHCHD10 and TUBA4A, were performed in a Belgian cohort of 459 FTD, 28 FTD-ALS, and 429 ALS patients.
In TUBA4A, we detected a novel frameshift mutation (p.Arg64Glyfs*90) leading to a truncated protein in 1 FTD patient (1/459 of 0.22%) with family history of Parkinson's disease and cognitive impairment, and a novel missense mutation (p.Thr381Met) in 2 sibs with familial ALS and memory problems (1 index patient/429, 0.23%) in whom we previously identified a pathogenic Chromosome 9 open reading frame 72 repeat expansion mutation.
The present study confirms the role of CHCHD10 and TUBA4A in the FTD-ALS spectrum, although genetic variations in these 2 genes are extremely rare in the Belgian population and often associated with symptomatology of related neurodegenerative diseases including Parkinson's disease and Alzheimer's disease.
The tubulin alpha 4a (TUBA4A) gene has been recently associated with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
TUBA4A gene has recently been identified as a potential candidate amyotrophic lateral sclerosis(ALS)-associated gene using exome-wide rare variant burden analysis.
Here we studied the physiological function of CLAC-P/collagen XXV, a transmembrane-type collagen originally identified as a component of senile plaque amyloid of Alzheimer's disease brains, by means of generating Col25a1-deficient (KO) mice.
Collagen XXV alpha 1 (COL25A1) is a collagenous type II transmembrane protein purified from senile plaques of Alzheimer's disease (AD) brains.
The COL25A1 gene, located in 4q25, encodes the CLAC protein, which has been implicated in Alzheimer's disease (AD) pathogenesis.
Thus, in addition to the biochemical data, there is now genetic evidence of association between COL25A1 and risk for Alzheimer's disease.
Recently, a novel plaque-associated protein, collagenous Alzheimer amyloid plaque component (CLAC), was identified in brains from patients with Alzheimer's disease.
The biological function and the contribution of CLAC to the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease and plaque formation are unknown.
CLAC (collagenous Alzheimer amyloid plaque component) is a proteolytic fragment derived from a novel membrane-bound collagen, CLAC-P/collagen type XXV, that deposits in senile plaques associated with amyloid beta peptides (Abeta) in the brains of patients with Alzheimer's disease.
These results suggest the anti-amyloidogenic roles of CLAC in the pathophysiology of Alzheimer's disease.
The analysis of breast cancer and pancreatic cancer data further shows iSPCA's satisfactory performance.
Tissue factor (TF) is a transmembrane receptor for coagulation factor VII/VIIa and is frequently overexpressed by cancer cells.
To identify the location of missed significant prostate cancer (sPCa) lesions by transrectal ultrasound-guided biopsy (TRUSbx) and multiparametric magnetic resonance imaging-guided biopsy (mpMRIbx) in men undergoing repeat biopsies.
Of the 289 patients, prostate cancer was detected in 128 (44%) with 88 (30%) having sPCa.
Overall, 165 separate prostate cancer lesions were detected with 100 being sPCa.
Factor VII (FVII) activating protease (FSAP) is a circulating serine protease that is likely to be involved in a number of disease conditions such as stroke, atherosclerosis, liver fibrosis, thrombosis and cancer.
In the absence of factor VII in platelet-free plasma, thrombin generation in solid pancreatic cancer cell lines was significantly reduced unlike in haematological cell lines.
SPCA gene expression is significantly elevated in breast cancer subtypes that are associated with microcalcifications.
Clinically significant cancer (SPCa) was defined as Gleason score &gt;=3 + 4.
Heritable disorders of connective tissue (marfan syndrome, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, adult polycystic kidney disease, floppy mitral valve/mitral valve prolapse); congenital heart disease (bicuspid aortic valve); inflammatory/immunologic disorders (rheumatic fever, AIDS, Kawasaki disease, syphilis, seronegative spondyloarthropathies, systemic lupus erythematosus, antiphospholipid syndrome); endocardial disorders (nonbacteremic thrombotic endocarditis, infective endocarditis, endomyocardial fibroelastosis); myocardial dysfunction (ischemic heart disease, dilated cardiomyopathy, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy); diseases and disorders of other organs (chronic renal failure, carcinoid heart disease); aging (calcific aortic stenosis, mitral annular calcification); postinterventional valvular disease; drugs and physical agents are all clinical entities associated with VHD.
Described here is an autopsy case of a 61-year-old man with polycystic kidney disease who had P. multocida bacteremia and acute infective endocarditis with multiple bacterial clumps involving bicuspid aortic valve.
Twenty-five people with COPD + PC (mean (standard deviation (SD)) age 73 (11) years, Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) stage II-IV), 25 people with COPD (70 (8) years, GOLD stage II-IV) and 25 controls (70 (7) years) wore the SenseWear Pro3 Armband for 7 days.
Patients with severe atopic dermatitis had a decreased CD4+CD29+: CD4+CD45RA+ ratio (p &lt; 0.01).
No significant changes in the CD4+CD29+: CD4+CD45RA+ ratio were found in the peripheral blood of patients with clinically mild or moderate atopic dermatitis.
Tissue sections from the skin of patients with atopic dermatitis were investigated by means of hematoxylin-eosin staining, the avidin-biotin-peroxidase complex method, and double-labeling immunofluorescence using monoclonal antibodies to cell-surface antigens, including CD45R and CD29.
These novel data demonstrate the role of HDAC2-mediated epigenetic mechanisms in anxiety and alcoholism.
The mRNA levels of cholesterol transport regulators ABCA1 and ABCG1 were markedly downregulated by UVB, parallel to the lamellar ichthyosis related glucosylceramide transporter ABCA12 and the suspected sphingosine-1-phosphate and cholesterol sulfate transporter ABCC1.
To investigate the potential tumour suppressor functions of glutathione peroxidase 7 (GPX7) and examine the interplay between epigenetic and genetic events in regulating its expression in oesophageal adenocarcinomas (OAC).
The goal of this study was to investigate the expression and secretion levels in vitro and in vivo of kallikrein 10 in uterine serous papillary carcinoma, a highly aggressive variant of endometrial tumor.
Human kallikrein 10 gene expression levels were evaluated in 11 snap-frozen uterine serous papillary carcinoma biopsies and 6 normal endometrial cell biopsies by real-time polymerase chain reaction.
Secretion of kallikrein 10 protein by 10 primary tumor cultures including 3 uterine serous papillary carcinomas, 2 endometrioid carcinomas, and 5 ovarian serous papillary tumors was measured using a sensitive ELISA.
Finally, kallikrein 10 concentration in 75 serum and plasma samples from 22 healthy women, 20 women with benign diseases, 21 women with endometrioid carcinomas, and 12 uterine serous papillary carcinoma patients was studied.
Kallikrein 10 gene expression levels were significantly higher in uterine serous papillary carcinoma when compared with normal endometrial cell biopsies (mean copy number by real time polymerase chain reaction = 743 versus 1.4; uterine serous papillary carcinoma versus endometrioid carcinoma: P &lt; .02).
In vitro kallikrein 10 secretion was detected in all primary uterine serous papillary carcinoma cell lines tested (mean = 2.7 microg/L), and the secretion levels were not significantly different to those found in primary ovarian serous papillary tumor cultures (mean 4.2 microg/L).
In contrast, serum and plasma kallikrein 10 values in uterine serous papillary carcinoma patients (1.2 +/- 0.1) were significantly higher than those in the non-cancer group (P = .002), benign group (P = .002), and endometrioid carcinoma patients (P = .005).
Kallikrein 10 is highly expressed in uterine serous papillary carcinoma, and it is released in the plasma and serum of uterine serous papillary carcinoma patients.
Kallikrein 10 may represent a novel biomarker for uterine serous papillary carcinoma.
The present investigation was designed to clarify the role of the subcommissural organ (SCO) in the pathogenesis of hydrocephalus occurring in the HTx rat.
At the same time, it functions as a transcriptional regulator of particular genes and as a cytokine: HMGB-1 released from a defective cell has been reported to induce damage to the adjacent cells.With a view to examine the relationship between neuronal damage caused by hydrocephalus and HMGB-1, we analyzed the expression of HMGB-1 in the cerebellum, cerebrum, and hippocampus of 1-day-old congenitally hydrocephalic H-Tx rats.As opposed to nonhydrocephalic H-Tx rats, the hydrocephalic H-Tx rats were observed to show stronger expression of HMGB-1 in the cerebellum, cerebrum, and hippocampus.
All studies utilized an animal model such as AQP4-knockout mice, H-Tx rats, and kaolin and L-Alfa-lysophosphatidylcholine (LPC) stearoyl injection models of hydrocephalus.
The purpose of this study was to determine the efficacy of minocycline, an antibiotic known for its anti-inflammatory properties, to reduce gliosis in the H-Tx rat model of congenital hydrocephalus.
It has been well documented that up to 70% of H-Tx rats' offspring suffer from severe hydrocephalus, which can be fatal if it remains untreated.
Aside from the well-documented hydrocephalus, H-Tx rats may develop other intracranial malformations that have not yet been documented in the literature.
We investigated the effect of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-C on lymphangiogenesis, inflammation, and fibrosis in the mouse kidney using the unilateral ureteral obstruction (UUO) model.
Renal fibrosis was consequently attenuated in the UUO+VEGF-C group.
Enhancement of the VEGF-C signaling pathway in LECs may be a therapeutic strategy for renal fibrosis.Laboratory Investigation advance online publication, 30 October 2017; doi:10.1038/labinvest.2017.77.
However, the relevance of urinary and circulating VEGF-A165b levels in chronic kidney disease patients remains unclear.
Therefore, the present study aimed to investigate the urinary and circulating VEGF-A165b levels in patients with chronic kidney disease.
A low urinary VEGF-A165b level reflects renal dysfunction in the chronic kidney disease stage, while a high circulating VEGF-A165b level cannot be attributed to decreased renal clearance.
By using a novel, advanced, multicolor fluorescence in situ hybridization approach, we enumerated copy numbers of six genes previously identified by array comparative genomic hybridization to be involved in aggressive prostate cancer [TBL1XR1, CTTNBP2, MYC (alias c-myc), PTEN, MEN1, and PDGFB] in six nonrecurrent and seven recurrent radical prostatectomy cases.
The identification of higher NIHSS scores, higher HAMD scores, lower dopamine level, lower 5-hydroxytryptamine level, higher tumor necrosis factor-Alfa level, and lower nerve growth factor level might be useful for clinicians in recognizing and treating depression in patients after a stroke.
Other effects include a reduction in the platelet levels of adenosine triphosphate (ATP), serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine), platelet factor 3 (PF3), PF4 and Beta-thromboglobulin (BTG), decreased platelet adhesiveness in platelets from healthy volunteers and from atherosclerotic patients and an improvement in red blood cell deformability in patients with occlusive vascular disease.
Objective: To explore the effect of trimetazidine pre-treatments on serum 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) and serotonin transporter (SERT), platelet 5-HT and SERT in the Sprague Dawley rats with myocardial infarction(MI), depression, and myocardial infarction co-exist with depression (MI+ depression) and in sham operated rats.
The role of histone deacetylase-3 (HDAC3) in allergic skin inflammation was reported.
In this study, we investigated SERPINA3 expression in glioma tissue samples and its significance in predicting the prognosis of glioma patients.
We found that SERPINA3 was upregulated in glioma tissue at both mRNA and protein levels, compared with noncancerous brain tissues.
We also found that high SERPINA3 expression in glioma tissues correlated significantly with advanced World Health Organization grade.
Univariate and multivariate analyses revealed that high SERPINA3 expression was an independent prognostic factor for poor overall survival of glioma patients.
Taken together, our results suggest that SERPINA3 plays an oncogenic role in glioma progression and provide an insight into the application of SERPINA3 as a novel predictor of clinical outcomes and a potential biomarker of glioma.
To investigate the expression and prognostic value of Alfa1-ACT (Alpha1-antichymotrypsin) in patients with HCC (hepatocellular carcinoma) and identify the mechanism by which Alfa1-ACT inhibits proliferation and promotes apoptosis of HCC.
Deletions were found in LEC1 (9.5% versus 14.3%), LEC2 (4.8% versus 14.3%), cagT (33.3% versus 28.6%), cagE (28.6% versus 28.6%) and the promoter region of the cagA (19.0% versus 42.9%) of gastritis and PUD strains, respectively.
In the seven women, increased FDG uptake was due to physiological endometrial uptake (n=2), leiomyoma (n=1), corpus luteum cyst (n=1), physiological ovarian uptake (n=1), urinary leak (n=1), and nonspecific colitis (n=1).
The most significant quantitative trait locus, Hsm1 (hereditary spherocytosis modifier 1), localizes to mouse Chromosome 12 and is dominant.
Rates of noninfective synovitis and effusion ranged from 0.2% in the LARS ACL group to 27.6% in the Gore-Tex ACL group.
Preliminary results for newer-generation devices, specifically the LARS, show lower reported rates of failure, revision, and sterile effusion/synovitis when compared with older devices.
The Ligament Augmentation and Reconstruction System (LARS) is a third generation of synthetic ligament, designed to overcome the issues of graft failure and synovitis which led previous generations of synthetic ligaments to fall out of favour.
Usher syndrome type III (USH3), characterized by progressive deafness, variable balance disorder and blindness, is caused by destabilizing mutations in the gene encoding the clarin-1 (CLRN1) protein.
Mutations in the CLRN1 gene cause Usher syndrome type 3 (USH3), a human disease characterized by progressive blindness and deafness.
Taken together, CD47 might be a novel target to enhance anti-PD-1 and CLTA-4 efficacy in esophageal squamous cell cancer.
Ipilimumab, a humanized CLTA-4 antibody is a standard therapy in the treatment of advanced melanoma.
The most prominent example of this shift is the management of metastatic melanoma, where BRAF and MEK inhibition and CLTA-4 blockade have established an entirely new standard of care in the last 3 years.
This was associated with the decreased protein expression of Notch1, Notch2, Notch3 and Hey1, and the increased expression of the tumor suppressor microRNA (miR or miRNA)-200 family members (miR-200a, miR-200b, miR-200c, miR-141 and miR-429) that are typically downregulated in colon cancer.
Phosphorylated IGF-IR/IR (P-IGF-IR/IR) and its downstream signaling partner phospho-S6 (P-S6) were evaluated immunohistochemically in tumor tissue microarrays representing 438 cases of invasive breast cancer.
Importantly, P-IGF-IR/IR was detected in all breast cancer subtypes (luminal, 48.1%; triple negative, 41.9%; and HER2, 64.3%).
Thus, we can determine which patients have the activated receptor and provide evidence that P-IGF-IR/IR is a prognostic factor for breast cancer.
Beyond this, P-IGF-IR/IR could be a predictive marker for response to IGF-IR and/or IR-targeted therapies, as these inhibitors may be of benefit in all breast cancer subtypes including those with acquired resistance to tamoxifen.
The genes plo, fimA, fimC, fimE, fimG, nanH, nanP, and cbpA were investigated in 71 T. pyogenes strains recovered from cattle, sheep, goats, dogs, equines, and a pig, recovered from mastitis (n = 35), and non-mastitis (n = 36) cases (abscesses, reproductive tract diseases, pneumonia, lymphadenitis, encephalitis).
The aim was to assess the prevalence of anaemia among quranic schoolchildren in khalawi Wad EL Magboul village, rural Rufaa, Gezira State, central Sudan.
Thrombophilia was present in 294/482 (60.9%) patients: 189/350 LC (54.0%), 31/47 (66.0%) HCC, 29/39 (74.4%) MPN, 35/38 AD (92.1%), and 10/10 (100%) WAD, and 54/150 (36.0%) in HC.
A cross-sectional study was conducted to investigate the prevalence of anaemia, iron, zinc and copper deficiencies among pregnant women in Wad Medani hospital, central Sudan and to examine the relationship of these micronutrients with haemoglobin (Hb) levels.
In the orbivirinae this would result in 2 genera of cyanovirus (bluetongue, epizootic hemorrhagic disease, Eubenangee and Palyam sub-genera) and Kemerovovirus (Chenunda, Great Island, Kemerovo and Wad Medani sub-genera) and a number of ungrouped sub-genera (African horsesickness, Changuinola, Corriparta, equine encephalosis, Wallal and Warrego sub-genera and the remaining ungrouped viruses).
We examined the expression of CT-1, leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF), and gp130 by competitive RT-PCR and Western blotting in Dahl salt-sensitive (DS) rats with a high-salt diet, which showed a distinct transition from left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) to congestive heart failure (CHF).
New factors signaling independently of the leukemia inhibitory-factor receptor pathway may sustain cardiomyocyte cell proliferation and thus be a future target for gene therapy of cardiomyopathies and cell therapy of the myocardium.
We propose a model in which P-Rex1 acts as a crucial node for the integration of upstream inputs from HER/ErbB receptors and CXCR4 in luminal breast cancer cells.
Notably, there is a significant association in the expression of P-Rex1 and MMP10 in human luminal breast cancer, and their co-expression is indicative of poor prognosis.
Treatment of normal MCF-10A or basal-like cancer cells, MDA-MB-231 with the demethylating agent 5-aza-2'-deoxycitidine in combination with the histone deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin A restores P-REX1 levels to those observed in luminal breast cancer cell lines, suggesting that aberrant expression of P-REX1 in luminal breast cancer is a consequence of PREX1 promoter demethylation.
We identify 112 candidate ciliogenesis and ciliopathy genes, including 44 components of the ubiquitin-proteasome system, 12 G-protein-coupled receptors, and 3 pre-mRNA processing factors (PRPF6, PRPF8 and PRPF31) mutated in autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa.
Mutations in six spliceosomal proteins, PRPF3, PRPF4, PRPF6, PRPF8, PRPF31 and SNRNP200, cause retinitis pigmentosa (RP), a disease characterized by progressive photoreceptor degeneration.
In addition, a pAsn477Ser change in the neighboring gene PRPF6, a gene previously found to be associated with retinitis pigmentosa, segregated with the ADKD phenotype.
Yeast two-hybrid analyses suggest a link between retinitis pigmentosa and an aberrant hPrp31-hPrp6 interaction that blocks U4/U6-U5 tri-snRNP formation.
In humans and in mice, mutations in the Ostm1 gene cause the most severe form of osteopetrosis, a major bone disease, and neuronal degeneration, both of which are associated with early death.
Genetic defects in OSTM1 (osteopetrosis-associated transmembrane protein 1) cause autosomal recessive osteopetrosis in humans.
Thus, these findings suggest that autosomal recessive osteopetrosis patients with an OSTM1 gene mutation lacking the transmembrane domain produce a secreted form of truncated OSTM1 that inhibits osteoclastogenesis.
Loss of the lysosomal ClC-7/Ostm1 2Cl(-)/H(+) exchanger causes lysosomal storage disease and osteopetrosis in humans and additionally changes fur colour in mice.
Loss of Ostm1 leads to the most severe form of osteopetrosis in mice and humans.
Mice lacking either ClC-7 or Ostm1 develop a lysosomal storage disease and mutations in either protein have been found to underlie osteopetrosis in mice and humans.
Mice or humans lacking ClC-7 or Ostm1 display osteopetrosis and lysosomal storage disease.
Here we describe for the first time homozygous microdeletions of different sizes affecting the OSTM1 gene in two unrelated consanguineous families with children suffering from neuronopathic infantile malignant osteopetrosis.
Our findings are summarized as follows: i) BPY2 (testis basic protein on Y, 2), DAZ1 (deleted in azoospermia 1), TTY4 (testis transcript Y 4) mRNAs and 23 ESTs were found; ii) Eighteen of 23 ESTs were transcripts of the DAZ gene(s), one EST was a transcript of TTY4 gene, and the remaining 4 probably corresponded to 4 different pseudogenes; iii) DAZ gene(s) were expressed not only in testis, but also in lung carcinoma cells, stomach and Ewing's sarcoma cells; iv) beta-satellite clusters were present around and within the BPY2 and TTY4 gene region; v) In this study, TTY4, BPY2 and DAZ1 genes were mapped precisely to the AC010088 region.
Lowered POMC and heightened TRPV3 expressions in the HN and mNTS are involved in development of hyperphagia and obesity in OP rats.
Here, we have shown that it is applicable to 10 human colorectal carcinoma cell lines with a direct correlation between viral toxicity and CPG2 production.
Ten patients with colorectal carcinoma expressing carcinoembryonic antigen received antibody-directed enzyme prodrug therapy with A5B7 F(ab')2 antibody to carcinoembryonic antigen conjugated to carboxypeptidase G2 (CPG2).
Human tumor cell lines A2780, SK-OV-3 (ovarian adenocarcinomas), LS174T, and WiDr (colon carcinomas) were engineered to express constitutively either CPG2 or bacterial beta-galactosidase.
They have been used to treat mouse models of connective tissue disease such as lumican-null (Lum) and mucopolysaccharidosis (Gusb) mice.
Expression of fibromodulin was significantly higher in plaques obtained from patients with diabetes and a high fibromodulin expression was associated with a higher incidence of post-operative cerebrovascular events, whereas no such associations were seen for lumican.
This study aimed to identify which myometrial ECM components are affected by diabetes, including fibril-forming collagen types I, III and V, as well as proteoglycans, decorin, lumican, fibromodulin and biglycan.
Using the polymicrobial model of murine sepsis, we investigated the role of C5a receptors in septic lymphopenia.
In wild-type mice, cecal ligation and puncture resulted in splenocyte apoptosis and significant lymphopenia after 3 d, which was not observed in C5aR1(-/-) or C5aR2(-/-) mice.
NDT 9513727 effectively inhibited C5a-induced neutropenia in gerbil and cynomolgus macaque in vivo.
Nonetheless, topical application of C5aR antagonists produced circulating levels of the drugs that antagonized the LPS-induced systemic responses of neutropenia and hypotension.
Several of these antigens (CD2, CD25, CD35, CD88, CD203c) appear to be upregulated on MCs in patients with systemic mastocytosis and therefore are used as diagnostic markers.
This study analysed the expression of various complement-related cell surface antigens (CD11b/CR3, CD11c/CR4, CD35/CR1, CD55/DAF, CD59/MIRL, CD88/C5aR) on bone marrow mast cells (BMMC) in patients suffering from systemic mastocytosis (SM), other haematological diseases and non-haematological disorders (control groups).
A cyclic peptide, Phe-[Orn-Pro-D-Cyclohexylalanine-Trp-Arg] (F-[OPdChaWR]), was recently shown in vitro to antagonise the binding of C5a to its receptor (CD88) on human polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs) and in vivo to inhibit the neutropenia associated with septic shock induced by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) in rats.
Some in vivo activities of two complement C5a agonist analogues have been evaluated by measuring changes in blood pressure and neutropenia in the rat and comparing the results with their receptor affinities in peritoneal macrophages and polymorphonuclear leucocytes (PMNs).
The abnormal C5aR expression on eosinophils and neutrophils became normal after spontaneous resolution of symptoms and blood eosinophilia.
The therapeutic potential of DPPSC was tested in a wound healing mouse model and in two genetic mouse models of muscular dystrophy (Scid/mdx and Sgcb-null Rag2-null Gammac-null).
Mutations in the RAG1/RAG2 genes are associated with a broad spectrum of clinical phenotypes, ranging from severe combined immunodeficiency to various autoimmune diseases.
In this review, the molecular pathology of diseases caused by RAG1/RAG2 mutations, in particular Omenn syndrome, will be discussed.
Severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) is a potentially fatal primary immunodeficiency (PID) that is caused by mutations in genes such as IL2RG, JAK3, IL7RA, RAG1, RAG2, and ADA.
Severe combined immunodeficiency can be caused by loss-of-function mutations in genes involved in the DNA recombination machinery, such as recombination-activating gene 1 (RAG1), RAG2, or DNA cross-link repair 1C (DCLRE1C).
Seven of the 98 cases (7%) of carcinomas showed TLE-1 expression, including 1 each of prostate adenocarcinoma (ADCA), esophageal ADCA, basal cell carcinoma, adrenocortical carcinoma, endometrial ADCA, ovarian serous carcinoma, and small cell carcinoma.
Here, we evaluated the effects of 15d-PGJ2 alone and in combination with the tyrosine kinas inhibitor (TKI) dasatinib in uterine sarcoma cell lines (MES-SA, MES-SA/DX5 and SKN).
Previous studies have shown that N(1),N(12)-bis(all-trans-retinoyl)spermine (RASP), a retinoid analog, inhibits RNase P activity and angiogenesis in the chicken embryo chorioallantoic membrane, demonstrates anti-tumor activity on prostate cancer cells, and acts as anti-inflammatory agent, being more effective and less toxic than all-trans retinoic acid.
These results suggest RASP, as a promising lead compound for the treatment of several dermatological disorders and certain cancer types, has apparently minimal toxic side-effects as revealed in this two-generation reproduction study in rats.
To determine the functional significance of Hhat expression in breast cancer, we used a panel of breast cancer cell lines that included estrogen receptor (ER) positive, HER2 amplified, triple negative, and tamoxifen resistant cells.
Depletion of Hhat decreased anchorage-dependent and anchorage-independent proliferation of ER positive, but not triple negative, breast cancer cells.
These data suggest that Hhat plays a critical role in ER positive, HER2 amplified, and hormone resistant breast cancer proliferation and highlights the potential promise of Hhat inhibitors for therapeutic benefit in breast cancer.
Hedgehog acyltransferase (HHAT) is the enzyme in the endoplasmic reticulum that palmitoylates Hedgehog proteins, is a member of a small subfamily of membrane-bound O-acyltransferase proteins that acylate secreted proteins, and is an important drug target in cancer.
The STARD3 gene belongs to the minimal amplicon in HER2-positive breast cancers and encodes a cholesterol-binding membrane protein.
To study how elevated StAR-related lipid transfer protein 3 (StARD3) expression affects breast cancer cells, we generated MCF-7 cells stably overexpressing StARD3-green fluorescent protein.
In two Finnish nationwide patient cohorts, approximately 10% (212/2220) breast cancers exhibited high StARD3 protein levels, which was strongly associated with HER2 amplification; several factors related to poor disease outcome and poor breast cancer-specific survival.
In addition, high StARD3 levels in breast cancers were associated with elevated 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase mRNA levels and anti-Src-Tyr416 immunoreactivity.
These results provide evidence that StARD3 overexpression results in increased cholesterol biosynthesis and Src kinase activity in breast cancer cells and suggest that elevated StARD3 expression may contribute to breast cancer aggressiveness by increasing membrane cholesterol and enhancing oncogenic signaling.
In addition it will discuss the clinical and biological implications of the amplification of ten other genes at this locus (MED1, STARD3, GRB7, THRA, RARA, IGFPB4, CCR7, KRT20, KRT19 and GAST) in breast cancer.
Using a quantitative polymerase chain reaction method and DNA extracted from frozen tumor specimens, 11 genes (MED1, STARD3, HER2, GRB7, THRA, RARA, TOP2A, IGFBP4, CCR7, KRT20, KRT19 and GAS), which are localized within Chr17q12-q21 and have a putative role in breast cancer development, were quantified.
The metastatic lymph node 64 (MLN64) gene was initially identified as highly expressed in the metastatic lymph node from breast cancer.
However, the role played by MLN64 in breast cancer remains unclear.
In the present study, the expression of MLN64 was examined in a breast cancer cohort using quantitative real-time PCR and immunohistochemical staining.
A panel of breast cancer cell sublines was subsequently developed by knockdown of MLN64 expression.
In conclusion, MLN64 is overexpressed in breast cancer, and its level correlates with poor prognosis and patient survival.
MLN64 contributes to the development and progression of breast cancer through the regulation of cell proliferation and adhesive capacity.
STARD3 and RARA also hold clinical relevance, the former having been shown to function in steroidogenesis and therefore implicated in hormone-receptor-positive breast cancer.
We used a genetic association study design to determine if common genetic variation (frequency&gt;or=5%) in a 400-kb region surrounding ERBB2 and containing the PPARBP, CRK7, NEUROD2, PPP1R1B, STARD3, TCAP, PNMT, CAB2, ERBB2, C17ORF37, GRB7 and ZNFN1A3 genes, was associated with breast cancer risk.
The applicability of salivary Beta -hexosaminidase (Beta-HEX A%, percentage of Beta-HEX A isoenzyme to total Beta-HEX) and Beta-HEX B% (Beta-HEX B/Beta-HEX) indexes was investigated as a possible marker of periodontitis.
Salivary Beta-HEX A% is a promising excellent marker for the diagnosis of periodontitis.
To evaluate the prognostic impact of gene expression levels (ELs) of two tumor suppressor genes, sprouty 4 (SPRY4, located on 5q) and lysine methyltransferase 2C (KMT2C, located on 7q) in correlation with clinical characteristics and genetic abnormalities assessed at initial diagnosis in acute myeloid leukemia (AML).
As a well-defined antagonist in FGFR2-induced RAS/ERK activation, ectopic expression of sprouty (SPRY) family was reported in several kinds of cancers except gastric cancer.
Sprouty proteins are modulators of mitogeninduced signal transduction processes and therefore can influence the process of cancerogenesis.
The encoded protein of Sprouty homolog 4 (SPRY4) is associated with various human cancers.
We show that these retained super-enhancers are essential for rhabdoid tumor survival, including some that are shared by all subtypes, such as SPRY1, and other lineage-specific super-enhancers, such as SOX2 in brain-derived rhabdoid tumors.
As a member of the Sprouty family, Sprouty4 has been previously shown to function as a tumour suppressor in lung and breast cancer.
In this issue of Blood, Dietrich et al make the first observation of the presence of deleterious CDKN1B mutation in 16% of patients with hairy cell leukemia (HCL).
We previously found that global CypD knockout mice (KO) are protected from diet-induced glucose intolerance; however, the tissue-specific function of CypD and mPTP, particularly in the control of glucose homeostasis, has not been ascertained.
Mice lacking CypD were protected from high fat diet-induced glucose intolerance due to increased glucose uptake in skeletal muscle.
Adult CypD(-/-) developed hyperglycemia, insulin resistance and glucose intolerance albeit resistant to DIO.
In elderly patients, atrial fibrillation has a limited effect on VWF, and the age is an important factor affecting the endothelial function.
von Willebrand factor (VWF) is an independent risk factor for adverse events in patients with non-valvular atrial fibrillation (NVAF).
Higher VWF level correlated with higher CHADS2 scores and with progressing intensity of blood stasis in the left atrium and thrombus formation in all three time periods of atrial fibrillation duration.
Patients with atrial fibrillation (AF) exhibit higher plasma vWF and lower ADAMTS13 levels.
In a multicenter case-control association study, we studied the SNPs rs11136000 (clusterin, CLU), rs541458 (phosphatidylinositol binding clatrin assembly protein, PICALM), and rs1554948 (transcription factor A, and tyrosine kinase, non-receptor, 1, TNK1) according to the three age groups 50-65 years (group 1), 66-80 years (group 2), and 80+ years (group 3) in 569 older subjects without cognitive impairment (NoCI) and 520 Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients.
To study the association of apolipoprotein E (APOE), Clusterin (CLU) and phosphatidylinositol binding clathrin assembly protein (PICALM) polymorphisms in Alzheimer's disease (AD) subjects compared to cognitively normal control subjects in an Indian population.
Genome-wide association studies and meta-analyses implicated that increased risk of developing Alzheimer's diseases (AD) has been associated with the ABCA7, APOE, BIN1, CASS4, CD2AP, CD33, CELF1, CLU, CR1, DSG2, EPHA1, FERMT2, HLA-DRB1, HLA-DRB4, INPP5D, MEF2C, MS4A4A, MS4A4E, MS4A6E, NME8, PICALM, PLD3, PTK2B, RIN3, SLC24A4, SORL1, and ZCWPW1 genes.
The PICALM rs541458 T allele has been recognized as a risk factor for late-onset Alzheimer's disease, and age might modulate the effects that genetic factors have on cognitive functions and brain.
The association of variants in CLU, CR1, PICALM, BIN1, ABCA7, and CD33 genes with late-onset Alzheimer's disease (LOAD) was evaluated and confirmed through genome-wide association study.
In vivo, depletion of GDF-15 in Ras-driven tumor xenografts and in an orthotopic model of pancreatic cancer delayed tumor development.
Further, production of GDF-15 is directly regulated by NF-KB, and the colocalization of activated NF-KB and GDF-15 in epithelial ducts of human pancreatic adenocarcinoma supports the importance of this observation.
The present study investigated the association between cancer-associated weight loss and plasma GDF-15 concentration, as well as other biomarkers, in patients with metastatic lung or exocrine pancreatic cancer.
In pancreatic cancer patients, no association between GDF-15 levels and weight loss was identified.
The aim of the present case-control study was to compare the diagnostic value of ULBP2, MIC-1 and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9) in 359 serum samples, consisting of 152 cases of PC, 20 cases of pre-pancreatic cancer, 91 cases of chronic pancreatitis (CP) and 96 normal controls (NC).
Macrophage inhibitory cytokine 1 (MIC-1/GDF15) has been identified as a potential novel biomarker for detection of pancreatic cancer (PCa).
However, the diagnostic value of serum MIC-1 for pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), particularly for those at the early stage, and the value for treatment response monitoring have not yet been investigated.
CD30 ligand/TNFSF8, chordin-like 2, FGF-10/KGF-2, growth/differentiation factor 15, I-TAC/CXCL11, OSM, and SCF might represent as predictive biomarkers for gemcitabine and erlotinib response of patients with pancreatic cancer.
Radiologists evaluated following CT findings: maximum tumor diameter, percentage of solid component (%solid), air bronchogram, spiculation, adjacency of bullae or interstitial pneumonia (IP) around the tumor, notch, and pleural indent.
The results strongly suggest that electronic self-auscultation at a single location (suprasternal notch) can support diagnosis of pneumonia in patients with COPD.
We compared patients who underwent PAO for the treatment of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease hip dysplasia (CMTHD group) with patients who underwent PAO for treatment of hip dysplasia secondary to DDH in terms of (1) modified Harris Hip scores; (2) radiographic correction of acetabular dysplasia; and (3) the rate of complications.
Twenty-seven subjects with Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease who underwent a PAO between January 1991 and December 2010 were matched to 54 subjects with DDH on the basis of sex, age, date of surgery, and body mass index.
The purpose of this study is to evaluate the use of the Dega osteotomy in the treatment of hip pathology resulting from both developmental dysplasia (DDH) and neuromuscular disease (NM).
Neuromuscular dysplasia of the hip (NDH) is a sequel of neuromuscular disease, and generally presents later in childhood than DDH.
To explore this suggestion we ascertained the presence of neuromuscular disease within a cohort of DDH patients, and asked whether the neuromuscular condition is the initial etiology of the dysplasia or a coincidental finding.
We examined 45 infants with nondevelopmental dysplasia of the hip (non-DDH), including congenital deficiency of the femur (CDF) (20 infants), neuromuscular syndrome (five infants), skeletal dysplasia (15 infants), and infection (five infants), and present the sonographic findings.
In previous studies, we demonstrated that human RHBDD2 is over-expressed in the advanced stages of breast and colorectal cancers, suggesting a favorable role in cell proliferation.
So far little is known about the expression of RHBDD2 in other tissues and other species, and because of similarities between cancer and embryonic cells, this study focused on the evaluation of Rhbdd2 expression in embryonic and adult rat tissues.
Quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis showed a significant RHBDD2 mRNA overexpression in advanced breast cancer compared with normal tissue samples (p = 0.012).
Immunohistochemistry analysis showed a significant increase of RHBDD2 protein expression in association with breast cancer samples negative for progesterone receptor (p = 0.015).
Rhomboid domain containing 2 (RHBDD2) was previously observed overexpressed and amplified in breast cancer samples.
In order to identify biological pathways modulated by RHBDD2, gene expression profiles of RHBDD2 silenced breast cancer cells were analyzed using whole genome human microarray.
We used a lentivirus-based approach for stable silencing of RHBDD2 mRNA in the T47D breast cancer cell line, and we examined the transcriptional consequences on UPR genes as well as the phenotypic effects on migration and proliferation processes.
Based on these studies, we hypothesize that RHBDD2 overexpression in breast cancer could represent an adaptive phenotype to the stressful tumor microenvironment by modulating the ER stress response.
In previous studies, we identified rhomboid domain containing 2 (RHBDD2) gene to be markedly overexpressed in breast cancer patients that developed recurrence of the disease.
In this study, we evaluated for the first time RHBDD2 gene expression in colorectal cancer (CRC).
Overall, these results showed that RHBDD2 overexpression might play a role in colorectal cancer progression.
In the course of breast cancer global gene expression studies, we identified an uncharacterized gene known as RHBDD2 (Rhomboid domain containing 2) to be markedly over-expressed in primary tumors from patients with recurrent disease.
Western-blot, RT-PCR and cDNA sequencing analyses allowed us to identify two RHBDD2 alternatively spliced mRNA isoforms expressed in breast cancer cell lines.
Interestingly, siRNA-mediated silencing of RHBDD2 expression results in a decrease of MCF7 breast cancer cells proliferation compared with the corresponding controls (p=0.001).
In conclusion, our findings suggest that RHBDD2 over-expression behaves as an indicator of poor prognosis and may play a role facilitating breast cancer progression.
These effects could also be exerted via the upregulation of eight specific target genes, the subsequent over-activation of the PKC and PI3 K-Akt pathways, and the eventual abnormal cardiac development and VSD.
Reduced translation of CEBPA mRNA has been associated with increased proliferation of bronchial smooth muscle (BSM) cells of asthma patients.
HDM extract reduced the C/EBPAlfa expression in BSM cells of asthma patients, which coincided with significantly increased levels of calreticulin (CRT) protein, an inhibitor of CEBPA mRNA translation.
In conclusion, HDM extract reduced CEBPA mRNA translation, specifically in asthmatic BSM cells, and 1) upregulated CRT, 2) activated PAR2, and increased 3) IL-6 expression and 4) the proliferation of asthmatic BSM cells.
Airway smooth muscle cells from persons with asthma are deficient in C/EBP-alpha, which may explain the finding that CSs do not inhibit the proliferation of these cells in vitro.
CCAAT/enhancer-binding proteins (C/EBPs) control cell proliferation; lack of C/EBPalpha correlates with increased proliferation of bronchial smooth muscle cells (BSMCs) of asthmatic patients.
Expression and function of C/EBPalpha, beta, delta, and epsilon BSMCs of control subjects (n = 9), asthmatic patients (n = 12), and patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD; n = 10) were determined.
The asthmatic group did not appropriately express C/EBPalpha.
Protein analysis and electrophoretic mobility shift assay confirmed the disease-specific expression pattern of C/EBPalpha in asthmatic patients and C/EBPdelta in patients with COPD.
The reason for the differences which have been observed in the in vitro properties of airway smooth muscle derived from asthmatic individuals may result from an inherent "supercontractility", an increased tendency to proliferate due to the absence of an inhibitory transcription factor C/EBP-alpha, the influence of an altered extracellular matrix and/or a decrease in release of factors such as PGE(2) which would under normal circumstances inhibit both proliferation and contraction.
Hepatocellular carcinoma etiology had no detectable influence on miR-122 expression, whereas miR-152 was increased in HCV+ tissue samples.
Aberrant expressions of the miR-148/152 family (miR-148a, miR-148b, and miR-152) have been documented in many tumor tissues, including hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
And high expression of HLA-G further suppressed NK against cancer cells, providing a new concept that miR-152 was involved in HBV-induced hepatocellular carcinoma.
Further, FDA-approved arsenic trioxide (ATO) and the ND2-SmoA1 mouse model of Medulloblastoma (MB) were used to extend our analyses of combined MRI and Reverse Phase Protein Microarray (RPMA) data to assess tumor responses to ATO and to uncover the complexity of therapeutic molecular biology.
Importantly, while ASC deficiency did not affect normal cerebellar development, ASC knockout mice on the Smoothened (ND2:SmoA1) transgenic model of medulloblastoma exhibited a profound reduction in medulloblastoma incidence and a delayed tumor onset.
We report the use of IRDye 800CW chlorotoxin (CLTX) as a targeted imaging agent for brain tumors in a spontaneous mouse model of medulloblastoma, ND2:SmoA1.
Importantly, genetic deletion of Bax in medulloblastoma-prone ND2:SmoA1 transgenic mice greatly accelerated tumorigenesis.
Five common variants were associated with pancreatic cancer at nominal statistical significance (P &lt; 0.05) with the strongest finding for mt5460g in the ND2 gene [OR = 3.9; 95% confidence interval (CI), 1.5-10; P = 0.004] which encodes an A331T substitution.
Our findings indicate a critical role of HspBP1 in differential CHIP/Hsp70 activities in neuronal and glial cells and the greater neuronal vulnerability to misfolded proteins in neurodegenerative diseases.
In this study the adenoviral mediated over-expression of HSP70 interacting protein (HIP) alone was shown to significantly reduce inclusion formation in both an in vitro model of Spinal Bulbar Muscular Atrophy and a primary neuronal model of polyglutamine disease.
To explore the relationship of telomerase, MYC and JAK2 in chronic myeloproliferative diseases, we investigated hTERT and MYC expression in bone marrow cells of essential thrombocythemia (ET) and polycythemia vera (PV).
DCAF17 mutations are associated with Woodhouse-Sakati syndrome, a rare disorder characterized by alopecia, hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, sensorineural hearing loss, diabetes mellitus, and extrapyramidal movements.
Woodhouse-Sakati syndrome (WSS) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder characterized by alopecia, hypogonadism, diabetes mellitus, intellectual disability, sensorineural deafness, extrapyramidal signs, and low insulinlike growth factor 1 levels.
Woodhouse-Sakati syndrome consists of alopecia, hypogonadism, diabetes mellitus, mild mental retardation, sensorineural deafness and ECG abnormalities.
A population of CD80+Gr-1+ myeloid cells was found to be expanded in conventional as well as in bone marrow-transplanted mice with disseminated candidiasis, but its depletion increased the IFN-gamma-mediated antifungal resistance.
The patients with esophageal candidiasis had lower CD4+ cell counts (129/microliter) and CD4:CD8 ratios (0.23) than those with oropharyngeal candidiasis (CD4 179/microliter; CD4:CD8 0.35).
We served patients with cystic fibrosis (CF, n=29), cystic fibrosis related diabetes (CFRD, n=19) and healthy controls (n=18) a standardized breakfast (23 g protein, 25 g fat and 76 g carbohydrates) after an overnight fasting.
CNS anomalies included 12 Chiari malformations, 2 Dandy-Walker malformations (DWM), 1 variant of Dandy-Walker syndrome (DWS), 3 iniencephalies, 15 anencephalies, 1 alobar holoprosencephaly, 2 isolated hydrocephalies, 3 hydrocephalies with cerebellar hypoplasia, 1 occipital encephalocele, 1 lumbosacral myelomeningocele accompanied with microcephaly.
Acrania, alobar holoprosencephaly, cephaloceles, and spina bifida can confidently be diagnosed at that stage and should actively be looked for in every fetus undergoing first-trimester ultrasound.
We present a new case with 13q deletion syndrome phenotypically characterized by severe major malformations, some of them still undescribed, consisting of left diaphragmatic hernia, right pulmonary sequestration, hypoplastic left heart syndrome, pancreatic agenesis, polysplenia, and catastrophic central nervous system malformations: semilobar holoprosencephaly, occipital myelomeningocele, partial agenesis of the corpus callosum and agenesis of olfactory bulbs.
The early scan detected all cases of acrania, alobar holoprosencephaly, exomphalos, gastroschisis, megacystis and body stalk anomaly, 77% of absent hand or foot, 50% of diaphragmatic hernia, 50% of lethal skeletal dysplasias, 60% of polydactyly, 34% of major cardiac defects, 5% of facial clefts and 14% of open spina bifida, but none of agenesis of the corpus callosum, cerebellar or vermian hypoplasia, echogenic lung lesions, bowel obstruction, most renal defects or talipes.
The case presented is, to our knowledge, the first published report comprising a combination of a semilobar holoprosencephaly associated with a Chiari II malformation and a myelomeningocele diagnosed prenatally and confirmed by postmortem neuropathologic evaluation.
These findings indicate that in the case of pre- and postnatal detection of a myelomeningocele and/or Chiari II malformation, possible additional intracranial malformation, such as a semilobar holoprosencephaly, should also be taken into account and vice versa.
We report on a female still-birth with cebocephaly, alobar holoprosencephaly, cleft palate, lumbar spina bifida, sirenomelia, a single umbilical artery, and a 46,XX karyotype, but without maternal diabetes mellitus.
The current study provides novel evidence that TGFBeta upregulates the expression of multiple receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs), including IGF1R, EGFR, PDGFBetaR, and FGFR1 in human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells.
While numerical and functional defects of invariant NKT cells have been demonstrated in rheumatoid arthritis (RA), the detailed characterization of proliferative and secretory responses following CD1d-mediated presentation is lacking; the presence of non-invariant populations has never been assessed in human autoimmunity.
In adults, angiopoietin-2 (Ang-2) and its soluble receptor (sTie-2) are associated with diabetes, hypertension, and obesity and could be increased in children with OSA and obesity, particularly those with evidence of cardiometabolic alterations.
Children with obesity and OSA had significantly elevated plasma Ang-2 and sTie-2 levels compared to corresponding controls with and without obesity.
Ang-2 and sTie-2 plasma levels are increased in pediatric OSA and obesity, particularly when endothelial dysfunction or insulin resistance is detectable, and appear to decrease upon OSA treatment.
ANG-2 overexpressing mice show increased sWAT vascularization and are resistant to HFD-induced obesity.
We studied the effect of sleeve gastrectomy and the influence of FTO rs9930506 polymorphism on Tie-2, angiopoietin-1 and angiopoietin-2 expression in morbid obesity.
Those most at risk report a family history of at least one parent with a pre-existing G-alpha protein defect, including night blindness, pseudohypoparathyroidism or adenoma of the thyroid or pituitary gland.
We have previously shown that the ethanol extract of dried Angelica gigas Nakai (AGN) root exerts anticancer activity against androgen receptor (AR)-negative human DU145 and PC-3 prostate cancer xenografts and primary carcinogenesis in the transgenic adenocarcinoma of mouse prostate (TRAMP) model.
We showed previously that nuclear localization of the androgen receptor (AR) and expression of the androgen-responsive gene FK506-binding protein 5 (FKBP5) in esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC) tissues were associated with decreased patient survival, suggesting a role for androgens in this cancer.
Only 5 samples were ERG-/AR- corresponding to adenocarcinoma GS of 6.
AR was expressed by 54% (27/50) of ECA including 60% of low grade endometrioid carcinomas, 70% high grade endometrioid carcinomas, 70% serous carcinomas, 50% carcinosarcomas, and 20% clear cell carcinomas.
High AR expression was chiefly restricted to a subset of serous carcinomas (50%).
AR expression occurred most often in concert with ER staining, although 5 high grade cancers (1 serous carcinoma, 4 carcinosarcomas) showed AR expression in the absence of ER.
In summary, AR positivity is seen in over half of ECA in our study, including the majority of low grade endometrioid carcinomas, high grade endometrioid carcinomas, and serous carcinomas.
High level expression is seen in half of serous carcinomas and a subset of serous carcinomas and carcinosarcomas show some degree of AR staining in the absence of ER, suggesting a possible role for androgen inhibition in treatment of these cases.
IL-6 and the MSC markers CD166 and nestin were colocalized in macroscopically normal human cartilage taken from the lateral femoral compartment of knees with medial tibiofemoral osteoarthritis.
In conclusion, our findings support a model where Sirt3 plays a protective role against oxidative stress in oocytes exposed to maternal diabetes through deacetylating SOD2K68.
The aim of our study was to investigate the effects of LPL (rs320), LIPC (rs2070895), SCARB1 (rs5888), LCAT (rs2292318), CETP (rs708272), ADIPOQ (rs1501299), RETN (rs3745367), PON1 (rs662), and MNSOD (rs4880) gene polymorphisms on lipid metabolism and diabetic dyslipidemia.
Significant associations were observed between LPL (rs320) (p&lt;0.001), LIPC (rs2070895) (p&lt;0.001), SCARB1 (rs5888) (p&lt;0.001), LCAT (rs2292318) (p&lt;0.001), CETP (rs708272) (p&lt;0.001), ADIPOQ (rs1501299) (p=0.01), RETN (rs3745367) (p&lt;0.001), and MNSOD (rs4880) (p&lt;0.001) polymorphisms and diabetic dyslipidemia.
LPL (rs320), LIPC (rs2070895), SCARB1 (rs5888), LCAT (rs2292318), CETP (rs708272), ADIPOQ (rs1501299), RETN (rs3745367), and MNSOD (rs4880) polymorphisms play an important role in basic molecular metabolism in diabetic dyslipidemia.
We studied if YKL-40 is related to inflammation, fibrosis, and/or lung function in subjects exposed to asbestosis.
Plasma YKL-40 levels were significantly higher in subjects with asbestosis (n = 19) than in those with no fibrotic findings in HRCT following asbestos exposure (n = 66) or in unexposed healthy controls.
YKL-40 is a promising marker of cardiovascular disease and liver siderosis in Beta-TM patients.
The aim of the study was to analyse the level of serum YKL-40 and plasma chitotriosidase activity of patients with beta-thalassemia to assess whether their expression correlates with liver disease and degree of liver siderosis.
Our results demonstrated that (1) Invasive ductal carcinoma patients with low expression of Slit2 or Robo1 exhibited worse prognosis and brain-specific metastasis, but not liver, bone or lung.
Ten prognostic and diagnostic epigenetic breast cancer biomarkers (PITX2, RASSF1A, PLAU, LHX3, PITX3, LIMK1, SLITRK1, SLIT2, HS3ST2, and TFF1) were analyzed in tissue samples obtained from two patients with invasive ductal carcinoma of the breast.
The aim of this study is to determine the correlation between methylation status of multiple cancer genes, p16(INK4A), p14(ARF), Cyclin D2 and Slit2 in invasive ductal carcinoma of the breast and paired serum DNA and clinicopathological parameters.
To examine the role of IRS2 in allergic disease, we evaluated the responses of IRS2-deficient (IRS2(-/-)) mice.
Additional work further confirmed CDK6, RICTOR, and CTSB (cathepsin B) as targets of miR-218 and examined the functional role of one of these targets, CDK6, in medulloblastoma.
Overexpression of CDK6 is present in approximately one-third of medulloblastomas and is an independent poor prognostic marker for this disease.
MicroRNA (miR)-124 inhibits expression of CDK6 and prevents proliferation of glioblastoma and medulloblastoma cells in vitro.
We examined the effects of miR-124 overexpression on medulloblastoma cells both in vitro and in vivo and compared cell lines that have low and high CDK6 expression.
MiR-124 overexpression inhibits the proliferation of medulloblastoma cells, and this effect is mediated mostly through the action of miR-124 upon CDK6.
CDK6 is overexpressed in medulloblastoma patients and is associated with an adverse prognosis.
To investigate the role of CDK6 in medulloblastoma, we assayed the effect of CDK6 inhibition on proliferation by depleting expression with RNA interference (RNAi) or by inhibiting kinase function with a small molecule inhibitor, PD0332991.
Gene expression analysis revealed that CDK6 mRNA expression is higher than normal cerebellum in fifteen out of sixteen medulloblastoma patient samples.
Inhibition of CDK6 by RNAi significantly decreased medulloblastoma cell proliferation and colony forming potential.
Our findings suggest that targeting CDK6 with small molecule inhibitors may prove beneficial in the treatment of medulloblastoma, especially when combined with radiation.
In trichoblastic fibroma (three cases), CK1/5/10/14, CK7, CK8/18, CK10/11, CK14, CK17 and CK19 were expressed in the basaloid nests, and CK6 and involucrin were detected in the inner layers of keratinous cysts.
Since type 1 diabetes mellitus often begins in childhood, we used juvenile (4- to 5-wk-old) rats to demonstrate that a single bout of IIH (5 U/kg sc) reduced plasma glucose by 24% and peak epinephrine by 59% 1 day later.
Plasma membrane NADH oxidoreductase activity, studied using cytosolic NADH as substrate and assayed with DCIP as acceptor, was significantly increased in IDDM patients, suggesting a response to a deficient mitochondrial energetic activity.
Non insulin-dependent diabetic (NIDDM) mortality is 1.4 to 3.7 times that of non-diabetics.
In the COPD and asthma patients, the median urinary cotinine concentration was 167 ng/mL (range, 2-5,348 ng/mL) and 47 ng/mL (range, 5-2,735 ng/mL), respectively (p &lt; 0.0001), whereas the median eCO level was 8 ppm (range, 0-31 ppm) and 5 ppm (range, 2-45 ppm), respectively (p &lt; 0.05).
In 30 (29%) of the patients with asthma or COPD, the urinary cotinine concentration and the eCO level both belied the patient claims of not being current smokers.
We aimed to study eCO levels in asthmatics and detect the possible factors influencing them.
The differences in eCO levels among various asthmatic phenotypes and the correlations between eCO and other measured parameters (spirometric indices, Asthma Control Test score, exhaled nitric oxide, total IgE, blood eosinophils and marker of oxidative damage of proteins) were analysed.
Levels of eCO widely differed according to the selected characteristics of asthma.
Asthmatics showed higher eCO concentrations than controls (1.44 +/- 0.12 ppm vs. 0.91 +/- 0.11 ppm, p &lt; 0.001).
Acute exacerbation of asthma was accompanied by a significant increase in eCO compared to the clinically controlled stage (2.17 +/- 0.36 ppm vs. 1.33 +/- 0.13 ppm, p &lt; 0.001).
Atopic, non-atopic asthma and asthma associated with allergic rhinitis (AR) showed elevated levels of eCO.
The levels of eCO negatively correlated with the marker of protein oxidation in asthmatics, especially in atopic form and during acute exacerbation.
In a population of asthmatic children, eCO levels could be considered as a marker of both allergic inflammation and oxidative stress in the airways.
Concomitant AR and asthma control were the most important factors affecting the levels of eCO in asthmatic children.
eCO values have been evaluated as potential indicators of inflammation in asthma, stable COPD and exacerbations, cystic fibrosis, lung cancer, or during surgery or critical care.
Twenty-four non-smokers (10 male, 14 female, mean age 17.6 years) and 24 smokers (mean of 3.5 pack-years; 15 male, 9 female, mean age 17.8 years) were compared in terms of lung function, bronchial hyperreactivity (BHR), levels of exhaled carbon monoxide (eCO), exhaled nitric oxide (eNO), and blood counts.
The concentration of exhaled carbon monoxide (eCO) in young children with stable asthma and during acute asthma attack is not known.
In preschool-age children, eCO levels of those with asthma attacks (mean +/- SE, 2.7 +/- 0.3 p.p.m., n= 43) were significantly higher than those of subjects with asymptomatic asthma (0.5 +/- 0.1 p.p.m., P &lt; 0.05), URI (0.8 +/- 0.1 p.p.m., P &lt; 0.05) and healthy children (0.4 +/- 0.1 p.p.m., P &lt; 0.05).
A multivariate linear regression model showed that eCO was higher in children with asthma attacks independent of age and gender.
In 33 asthmatic children followed before and after treatment, eCO levels during asthma attacks significantly decreased after inhalation therapy with a combination of salbutamol and sodium cromoglycate (before therapy, 2.9 +/- 0.4 p.p.m.
The measurement of eCO using a novel collecting system is useful in the recognition of asthma in preschool children.
Elevations in E-CO have been observed in critically ill or post-surgical patients and those with various pulmonary diseases associated with inflammation, including chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), asthma, cystic fibrosis and infections.
The purpose of this meta-analysis is to determine whether eCO is elevated in asthmatics, is regulated by steroid treatment and reflects disease severity and control.
Observational studies comparing eCO in non-smoking asthmatics and healthy subjects or asthmatics before and after steroid treatment were included.
The eCO level was significantly higher in asthmatics as compared to healthy subjects and in intermittent asthma as compared to persistent asthma.
However, eCO could not distinguish between steroid-treated asthmatics and steroid-free patients nor separate controlled and partly-controlled asthma from uncontrolled asthma in cross-sectional studies.
eCO is elevated in asthmatics but levels only partially reflect disease severity and control.
eCO might be a potentially useful non-invasive biomarker of airway inflammation and oxidative stress in nonsmoking asthmatics.
However, recent studies revealed that genetic inhibition of SphK2 did not significantly impact the severity or progression of inflammatory arthritis, while pharmacologic inhibition of SphK2 led to significantly more severe arthritis.
Therefore, SphK2 plays a controversial role in arthritis.
A specific SphK2 inhibitor inhibited inflammatory arthritis in one model, while siRNA knockdown of SphK2 worsened arthritis in another.
To investigate the role of SphK2 in TNF-Alfa-induced arthritis, we developed SphK2 deficient hTNF-Alfa overexpressing mice and separately treated hTNF-Alfa mice with ABC294640, a SphK2-specific inhibitor.
Our data show that genetic inhibition of SphK2 did not significantly impact the severity or progression of inflammatory arthritis, while pharmacologic inhibition of SphK2 led to significantly more severe arthritis.
In this study, we examined the role of SphK1 and SphK2 in a murine collagen-induced arthritis model by down-regulating each isoenzyme via specific small interfering RNA (siRNA).
Together, these results demonstrate the distinct immunomodulatory roles of SphK1 and SphK2 in the development of inflammatory arthritis by regulating the release of proinflammatory cytokines and T cell responses.
Prefrontal Brodmann Areas (BA) BA46, BA47, and BA9 in autism and age-matched controls were analyzed by blinded researchers.
We show that the number of parvalbumin+ interneurons in these 3 cortical areas-BA46, BA47, and BA9-is significantly reduced in autism compared with controls.
These fetal structures generate regions with abnormal activity in autism, including the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (BA46), the pars opercularis of the inferior frontal cortex and the fusiform gyrus.
At the site of disease in leprosy, we found that S100A12 was more strongly expressed in skin lesions from tuberculoid leprosy (T-lep), the self-limiting form of the disease, compared to lepromatous leprosy (L-lep), the progressive form of the disease.
The aim of this study was to predict right ventricular dysfunction (RVD) using plasma concentration of D-dimer, pro-atrial natriuretic peptide (pro-ANP), brain natriuretic peptide (BNP), endothelin-1 (ET-1) and cardiac troponin I (TNI) in patients with pulmonary embolism (PE).
Atrial natriuretic petide (ANP), brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) and endothelin-1 (ET-1) may reflect the severity of right ventricular dysfunction (RVD) in patients with pulmonary embolism (PE).
Acute pulmonary embolism (PE) is a life-threatening disease, and several vasoconstrictors, including endothelin-1 (ET-1), play a key role in vasoconstriction and hypoxemia during the development of PE.
Impaired repression of cone-specific genes by the corepressors atrophin-1 (dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy [DRPLA] gene product) and atrophin-2 (arginine-glutamic acid dipeptide repeat [RERE] protein) appeared to be a molecular mechanism mediating the beneficial effect of the p.R311Q mutation.
RE repeats encoded (RERE) was identified recently as a protein with high homology to the atrophin-1 protein, which appears to be causal in the hereditary neurodegenerative disorder termed dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy (DRPLA) caused by an abnormal glutamine expansion.
The gene isolated, designated RERE, has an open reading frame of 1566 amino acids, of which the C-terminal portion has 67% homology to DRPLA, whereas the N-terminal portion is distinctive.
Immunoprecipitation and in vitro binding assays demonstrate that the DRPLA and RERE proteins bind each other, for which one of the RE repeats has a primary role, and extended polyglutamine enhances the binding.
Moreover, when RERE is overexpressed, the distribution of endogenous DRPLA protein alters from the diffused to the speckled pattern in the nucleus so as to co-localize with RERE.
More RERE protein is recruited into nuclear aggregates of the DRPLA protein with extended polyglutamine than into those of pure polyglutamine.
The DNB1/ARPh gene, which was found to be ubiquitously expressed in human adult and fetal tissues, is highly related to the DRPLA gene, in which expansion of a CAG triplet appears to be causal in the dentatorubral and pallidolysian atrophy disease phenotype.
Therefore, we evaluated the roles of CSNK2A1, SIRT6, and phosphorylated SIRT6 and their relationships in breast carcinoma.
This study demonstrates that CSNK2A1 and SIRT6 are indicators of poor prognosis for breast carcinomas and that CSNK2A1-mediated phosphorylation of SIRT6 might be involved in the progression of breast carcinoma.
RNA expression levels of CDC2L1, CDC2L2, CCNL1, CCNL2, CSNK2A1, CSNK2A2, and CSNK2B genes in breast cancer subtypes were analyzed.
Recent evidence suggests the role of Wnt signaling in human breast cancer involves elevated levels of nuclear and/or cytoplasmic beta-catenin using immunohistochemistry, overexpression or downregulation of specific Wnt proteins, overexpression of CKII and sFRP4, downregulation of WIF-1 and sFRP1, as well as amplification of DVL-1.
By combining the mutational data in the Catalogue of Somatic Mutations in Cancer (COSMIC) and the spatial information in the Protein Data Bank (PDB), SpacePAC is able to identify novel mutation clusters in many proteins such as FGFR3 and CHRM2.
Colorectal cancer (HCT 116, LoVo, C 170 HM 2, CaCO-2), fibroblast (46-BR.IGI, CCD-18 Co) and fibrosarcoma (HT1080) cell lines were irradiated at 4 gray (4 Gy) and matrix metalloproteinase gene and protein expression examined over a 96 h period by real time polymerase chain reaction and gelatin zymography.
In addition, because HBL is a major enterotoxin, we also designed HBL gene-specific polymerase chain reaction (PCR) primers, i.e., Hm1 and Hm2, that generated the same results as those of the hemolysis and BCET-RPLA assays.
Primers B16S1/B16S2 and Hm1/Hm2 could be combined into a multiplex PCR system for the simultaneous detection of B. cereus group cells and the possible presence of their HBL enterotoxins.
Positive cancer invasion in the cut end was classified as hm2 or dm2 in 8 patients and em2 in 13.
Biopsy samples from five acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS)-Kaposi's sarcomas and one non-AIDS-associated Kaposi's sarcoma were assayed by in situ RNA hybridization onto paraformaldehyde-fixed, paraffin-embedded skin sections for the presence of two fibroblast growth factor gene transcripts, FGFB and FGF5.
FGF5 gene expression was detected in the characteristic Kaposi's sarcoma spindle-shaped cells in the five samples from human immunodeficiency-positive (HIV+) patients.
Furthermore, they demonstrate a contrasting expression pattern of FGF5 and FGFB genes, both involved in the growth factor pathogenic cascade leading to Kaposi's sarcoma.
Objective To explore the efficacy of ganoderma lucidum preparation(Ling Zhi) in treating APP/PS-1 transgenic mouse models of Alzheimer's disease(AD).Methods APP/PS-1 transgenic mice of 4 months were randomly divided into model group,ganoderma lucidum treatment groups,including high [2250 mg/(kg*d)] and middle [750 mg/(kg*d)] dose groups,i.e.LZ-H and LZ-M groups,and the positive control group(treated with donepezil hydrochloride [2 mg/(kg*d)]).In addition,C57BL/6J wild mice were selected as normal group.The animals were administered for 4 months.Histopathological examinations including hematoxylin-eosin(HE) staining,immunohistochemistry,special staining,and electron microscopy were applied,and then the pathological morphology and structures in different groups were compared.
For the hydrogel prepared using the comonomer mixture with 5.0 wt % SBMA, the amount of adsorbed Lyz is 0.91 myg/cm2, which corresponds to only 56.8% of the amount adsorbed on EASY DAY(R) SCLs.
Objective To evaluate the efficacy of Ganoderma lucidum preparation on the behaviors,biochemistry,and autoimmunity parameters of mouse models of APP/PS-1 double transgenic Alzheimer's disease(AD).Methods A total of 44 4-month-old APP/PS-1 double transgenic AD mice were randomly divided into AD model group,Aricept group,Ganoderma lucidum middle-dose(LZ-M)group,and Ganoderma lucidum high-dose(LZ-H)group,with 11 mice in each group.In addition,10 4-month-old C57BL/6 mice were used as the control group.Water maze test was conducted to observe the behavior changes,and the protein expressions in brain tissues were detected by Western blot analysis.The autoimmune indicators were detected by indirect immunofluorescence method.Results In the navigation experiment,the time of finding the platform was gradually shortened since the 2nd day in the control,LZ-H,and LZ-M groups,and the time of searching the platform in the AD model group gradually increased.On the 5th day,the time of finding platform was significantly shorter in control group (t=5.607,P=0.000) and LZ-H group(t=2.750,P=0.010)than AD model group.In the space exploration experiment,the number of crossing the target platform(t=2.452,P=0.025)and the residence time in the target quadrant(t=2.530,P=0.020)in AD model group mice was significantly smaller/shorter than those in control group;in addition,the number of crossing the target platform in the AD model group was significantly smaller than that in LZ-H group(t=2.317,P=0.030)and LZ-M group(t=2.443,P=0.030),while the residence time in target quadrant decreased significantly(t=2.770,P=0.020)compared with LZ-H group;the number of crossing through the target platform quadrant(t=2.493,P=0.022)and residence time in the target quadrant(t=2.683,P=0.015)in LZ-H group were significantly higher than in Aricept group.Western blot analysis showed that the expression of ApoA1 in the brain tissues of mice in LZ-H and LZ-M groups were significantly higher than those in AD model group(P&lt;0.01,P&lt;0.05);ABeta-40 expression in LZ-H group was significantly lower than that in AD model group(P&lt;0.05);the expressions of Syt1,ApoE,and ABCA1 in brain tissues of mice in LZ-H group were significantly higher than those in model group(P&lt;0.01,P&lt;0.05).The plasma IgG level in Aricept group(t=30.945,P=0.000),LZ-M group(t=25.639,P=0.000)and LZ-H group(t=4.689,P=0.001)were significantly higher than that in the control group.Conclusion Ganoderma lucidum preparation can improve behavior disorders of AD model mice,promote the expressions of ApoA1,ApoE and Syt1,inhibit the expression of ABeta-40 protein,and improve the autoimmune function.
Somatic v-Raf murine sarcoma viral oncogene homolog B (BRAF) mutation, present in approximately 10% of metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC) cases, is associated with poor prognosis.
All colorectal cancer patients tested for BRAF mutation, from October 2010 to November 2014 were identified.
The prognostic role of the V600E mutation of v-raf murine sarcoma viral oncogene homolog B1 (BRAF) in metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC) is well established, but the therapeutic regimen targeting this disease is lacking.
The aim of our study was to evaluate the incidence of KRAS, NRAS, BRAF and PIK3CA mutations in metastatic colorectal cancer patients receiving first line oxaliplatin based chemotherapy with or without bevacizumab and to evaluate their prognostic and predictive significance.
Activating BRAF (V-raf murine sarcoma viral oncogene homolog B) mutations occur in approximately 5% to 10% of patients with metastatic colorectal cancer, mostly V600E mutation, and it is associated with distinct clinical and pathological features.
This review aims to provide data about new strategies to target to BRAF gene mutation in metastatic colorectal cancer.
The variables of age, incidence of autoimmune hepatitis, model of end-stage liver disease (MELD) score, values for total bilirubin and prothrombin time-international ratio (PT-INR), and Japan Hepatic Encephalopathy Prediction Model (JHEPM) probability at registration were significantly higher in ALF patients than in ALI patients.
On the other hand, the multivariate Cox proportional hazard model showed that positivity for serum anti-PD-1 antibody, probable diagnosis based on the revised scoring system proposed by the International Autoimmune Hepatitis Group, and prothrombin activity of less than 60% were associated with the later normalization of serum transaminase levels.
Myeloma cell maturity was classified via immunophenotyping: myeloma cells showing mature plasma cell 1 (MPC-1)-positive and CD49e-positive cells were considered mature type; MPC-1-positive and CD49e-negative cells were considered intermediate type; and MPC-1-negative cells were considered immature type.
The findings of this study demonstrate the clinical importance of myeloma cell classification according to immunophenotyping using MPC-1 and CD49e antibodies to determine patient prognosis in this era of novel therapeutic agents.
On the basis of biopsies of the masses in the pharynx and finger, he was diagnosed with extramedullary plasmablastic plasmacytoma, with somewhat immature CD45(+), MPC-1(-), and CD49e(-).
Changes to CD45 negativity and MPC-1 partial positivity were seen, while CD49e negativity persisted, suggesting that the plasmablastic plasmacytoma had reverted to a more immature state.
He had the following poor prognostic factors: 1) multiple extramedullary plasmacytomas, 2) massive myelomatous effusion, 3) increasing immature myeloma cells with plasmablastic morphology, and 4) predominance of MPC1-CD49e-CD45+ phenotype immature myeloma cells.
CD32 was significantly expressed on primary myeloma cells, but immature, MPC-1- myeloma cells expressed CD32 more weakly than mature, MPC-1+ cells.
Treatment with anti-CD32 antibody decreased the viability of normal plasma cells (CD38++ CD19+) more than that of myeloma cells (CD38++ CD19-); CD32-mediated growth suppression was greater in mature MPC-1+ cells than in immature MPC-1- cells.
To date, at least 5 subpopulations of plasma cells have been identified in the bone marrow of multiple myeloma (MM) patients with regard to the expression of MPC-1, CD49e (VLA-5), and CD45: MPC-1(-)CD49e(-)CD45(+) proliferative immature cells, MPC-1(-)CD49e(-)CD45(-) immature myeloma cells, MPC-1(+)CD49e(-)CD45(-) and MPC-1(+)CD49e(-)CD45(+) intermediate myeloma cells, and MPC-1(+)CD49e(+)CD45(+) mature myeloma cells.
In 31 cases of progressive MM disease, MPC-1(-) immature and MPC-1(-)CD45(+) proliferative immature myeloma cells were significantly increased up to &gt;25% and &gt;10%, respectively, of the plasma cell fractions (CD38(++) cells), whereas there were no increases in MPC-1(-) or MPC-1(-)CD45(+) proliferative immature myeloma cells in 15 cases of stable disease.
Interestingly, the proportions of MPC-1(-) and MPC-1(-)CD45(+) immature monoclonal plasma cells also increased in the 7 progressive cases of MGUS.
Results with flow cytometry using a combination of MPC1, CD49e, and CD45 supported the morphologic findings for the myeloma cells.
Interestingly, the region encompassing the SNF1LK locus has been implicated in congenital heart defects often observed in patients with Down syndrome.
On the other hand, a significant increase was demonstrated in CD14-positive cells at 3 weeks after immunization in only arthritis-developed monkeys regardless of sex.
We previously reported the accumulation of abnormal myeloid cell populations reacting with CD14 (MY4) monoclonal antibody in the iliac and epiphyseal bone marrow of patients with severe rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
Prior to treatment, monocyte-macrophage activation in rheumatoid arthritis was signified by an increased expression of HLA-class II antigens and the CD14 antigen, and by an increased production of neopterin and interleukin-1.
Monocytes, defined by staining with the Mo-2 and Leu-M3 monoclonal antibodies which both detect the CD14 antigen, were studied in peripheral blood of control subjects and patients with rheumatoid arthritis as well as in rheumatoid synovial fluid of the latter for expression of activation/differentiation markers.
We review recent findings implicating variants of FCRL3 (gene for FC receptor-like-3 protein), SCGB3A2 (gene for secretory uteroglobin-related protein 1- UGRP1) as well as other unverified possible candidate genes for GD selected through their documented association with type 1 diabetes mellitus: Tenr-IL2-IL21, CAPSL (encoding calcyphosine-like protein), IFIH1(gene for interferon-induced helicase C domain 1), AFF3, CD226 and PTPN2.
Autoantibody-positive diabetic subjects (n = 1,384) and population-based control subjects (n = 2,235) were genotyped at 20 childhood-onset type 1 diabetes loci and FCRL3, GAD2, TCF7L2, and FTO.
We analyzed the same four 5' FCRL3 single nucleotide polymorphism markers, together with three additional exonic single nucleotide polymorphisms in the FCRL3 gene, in cohorts of white Caucasians with Graves' disease (n = 625), type 1 diabetes (n = 279), autoimmune Addison's disease (AAD; n = 200), and RA (n = 769).
In vivo, in a model of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, we show that an agonist of DR3 suppressed disease, correlating with expansion of CD4+Foxp3+ Tregs, and this protective effect was lost in Galectin-9-/- mice.
Galectin-9 concentrations in CSF were higher in SPMS patients than healthy controls and RRMS patients in both cohorts.
Our objective is to identify phenotypically the position of CD43(+) B cells among peripheral B-lineage cell compartments in healthy donors, with reference to B-cell subsets from patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).
Previous studies indicate that CD43 plays a role in regulating the adhesion of lymphocytes, cell mutation and activation, however, little is known about its effect on systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).
Two new cases of primary Ficolin-3 deficiency are reported here: a 50-year old male, suffering from membranous nephropathy and an 11-month old male infant who was operated on to repair congenital heart disease.
In order to investigate its potential pathogenicity for turkeys a UK isolate of Mim from a partridge with sinusitis was first passaged through turkey poults and then assessed for pathogenicity in turkey embryo tracheal organ cultures (TOCs) and in one-day-old turkey poults with or without turkey rhinotracheitis virus (TRTV).
Both up- and down-regulation of the Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) of the sinonasal mucosa have already been associated with the pathogenesis of chronic rhinosinusitis with (CRSwNP) or without (CRSsNP) nasal polyps.
It is suggested that elevated plasma nociceptin level found in Wilson disease patients is due to inhibition of nociceptin-inactivating Zn-metallopeptidases (aminopeptidase N (APN) and endopeptidase 24.15) by the toxic copper deposits in liver and/or brain.
It is evident from the study that body iron (serum iron, TIBC &amp; transferrin saturation) level significantly increases among acute myocardial infarction patients in Bangladesh.
We investigated the relation of NTBI, serum iron, transferrin saturation, and serum ferritin with risk of CHD and acute myocardial infarction (AMI).
Studies investigating the contribution of Cytochrome P4502E1 (CYP2E1) polymorphisms to the etiology of urinary cancer draw inconsistent conclusions.
Thus, we performed a meta-analysis to evaluate the association between CYP2E1 Rsa I/Pst I and Dra I polymorphisms and urinary cancer susceptibility.
Meta-analysis based on the eligible case-control studies that assess the association of CYP2E1 Rsa I/Pst I and Dra I polymorphisms with urinary cancer was conducted.
We found decreased urinary cancer risk among subjects carrying CYP2E1 RsaI/PstI c1c2 + c2c2 genotype and c2 allele (OR = 0.73, 95% CI = 0.68-0.79 and OR = 0.79, 95% CI = 0.74-0.85, respectively), with 3,301 cases and 3,786 controls from 14 studies.
However, the meta-analysis based on 5 eligible studies showed no significant association between CYP2E1 Dra I polymorphism and urinary cancer susceptibility in either dominant model or the allele model.
Our meta-analysis concluded that CYP2E1 Rsa I/Pst I polymorphism correlates with urinary cancers risk in Asian population; while CYP2E1 Dra I polymorphism might be not significantly associated with the urinary cancer risks.
In this study, the effects of chiral pesticide metalaxyl on CYP1A1, CYP1A2, CYP2B1, CYP2B2, CYP2E1 and CYP3A were investigated in human hepatoma HepG2, rat hepatic H4IIE, chicken hepatic LMH and grass carp hepatic L8824 cells.
ER+ cancers exhibited lower ADORA1, ADORA2B, and RYR1 and elevated PDE4A, CYP2A6, and CYP2E expressions.
The mechanisms were investigated by detecting levels of NADPH Oxidase 4 (NOX4),p22phox, cytochrome P4502E1 (CYP2E1),Bax,B-cell lymphoma 2 (Bcl-2),cleaved-caspase 3 and 9 and phosphorylated extracellular regulated protein kinases(ERK),phosphorylated c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), and phosphorylated p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) using real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and Western blotting.
This study aimed to determine the serum levels of angiopoietin-like 4 (ANGPTL4) in patients with renal cell carcinoma (RCC) and explore its potential as a biomarker.
We have previously shown that angiopoietin-like 4 (angptl4) mRNA, a hypoxia-inducible gene, is highly expressed in clear cell renal-cell carcinoma (ccRCC), the most common subtype of RCC for which no specific marker is available.
We observed particularly high levels of ANGPTL4 mRNA in tumor cells of conventional renal cell carcinoma.
Results The smoking subgroup (n=15) of NSIP patients had a significantly lower % diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide/ alveolar ventilation (DLCO/VA) and tended to have higher SP-D values than the nonsmoking subgroup (n=16).
As compared with major IIPs such as idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis and fibrotic nonspecific interstitial pneumonia, IPPFE significantly showed higher frequency of cases with a unique pattern of serum biomarkers, which is characterized by an elevated level of SP-D with a normal range of KL-6.
However, associations of serum KL-6 and SP-D with radiologic findings in nonspecific interstitial pneumonia (NSIP) remain unclear.
To determine whether serum levels of KL-6 and SP-D reflect fibrotic and/or inflammatory processes in NSIP, we investigated the correlation between high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) findings and serum KL-6 and SP-D levels.
Serum levels of KL-6 and SP-D were measured in 21 patients with biopsy-confirmed NSIP.
Serum levels of SP-D in NSIP showed a positive correlation with the area of ground-glass attenuation without traction bronchiectasis and the inflammatory CT pattern, but the levels were inversely correlated with the area of ground-glass attenuation with traction bronchiectasis and the fibrotic CT pattern.
The results indicate that serum levels of KL-6 in NSIP reflect the overall extent of interstitial lesions, which include both inflammatory and fibrotic lesions, while the levels of SP-D mainly reflect the extent of inflammatory lesions.
Recently, we identified high expression of 2 RHOGAPs, ARHGAP11A and RACGAP1, in the basal-like breast cancer subtype.
We have established that, via the suppression of RhoA, ArhGAP11A and RacGAP1 are both critical drivers of BLBC growth, and propose that RhoGAPs can act as oncogenes in cancer.
We found significant methylation differences at a number of experimentally implicated breast cancer-related genes, including attenuated 5' untranslated region (UTR)/first exon methylation at the proinvasive ARHGAP11A gene in variant mimic-transfected cells.
Follow-up functional analyses revealed both concurrent increased ARHGAP11A mRNA expression and enhanced invasiveness in variant versus WT piR-021285 mimic-transfected breast cancer cell lines.
Expression of ARHGAP11A in cancer cells suppressed RhoA-dependent mechanisms, such as stress fiber formation and focal adhesion, which made the cells more prone to migrate.
RNAi-based inhibition of Arhgap11a reduced the invasion and in vivo expansion of cancers.
Additionally, analysis of human specimens showed the significant up-regulation of Arhgap11a in colon cancers, which was correlated with clinical invasion status.
The present study suggests that ARHGAP11A, a cell cycle-dependent RhoGAP, is a critical regulator of cancer cell mobility and is thus a promising therapeutic target in invasive cancers.
Identified genome-wide significant loci: 1) corroborated genes implicated in other studies (MTNR1B, ZNF259/APOA5, XPA/FOXE1 (TTF-2), DARC, CCR3, ABO); 2) localized novel genes in plausible biological pathways (PCSK2, ARHGAP11A, CHRNA3); and 3) revealed novel genes with unknown function in obesity pathogenesis (MATK, COL4A1).
In contrast to GTG banding, array CGH determined the exact number of deleted genes and thus allowed the identification of candidate genes for cleft palate (GREM1, CX36, MEIS2), congenital heart defect (ACTC, GREM1, CX36, MEIS2), and mental retardation (ARHGAP11A, CHRNA7, CHRM5).
The expression levels of four genes identified by microarray screening (PLCB2, HVCN1, CTSS, and DEF8) and one purine/thiopurine related gene (NME6) correlated significantly with the clinical activity of Crohn's disease.
ZNF366, involved in estrogen metabolism and progression of breast cancer, is a new biologically plausible candidate for endometriosis.
Recently, we have identified DC-SCRIPT (ZNF366) as a co-suppressor of ERAlfa and as a strong and independent prognostic marker in ESR1 (ERAlfa gene)-positive breast cancer patients.
In this study, we further investigated the molecular mechanism on how DC-SCRIPT inhibits breast cancer cell growth.
DC-SCRIPT mRNA levels from 190 primary ESR1-positive breast tumors were related to global gene expression, followed by gene ontology and pathway analysis.
The effect of DC-SCRIPT on breast cancer cell growth and cell cycle arrest was investigated using novel DC-SCRIPT-inducible MCF7 breast cancer cell lines.
In the primary ESR1-positive breast tumors, DC-SCRIPT expression negatively correlated with several cell cycle gene ontologies and pathways.
DC-SCRIPT expression strongly reduced breast cancer cell growth in vitro, breast tumor growth in vivo, and induced cell cycle arrest.
Moreover, in 1,132 primary ESR1-positive breast tumors, DC-SCRIPT expression also correlated with CDKN2B expression.
Collectively, these data show that DC-SCRIPT acts as a novel regulator of CDKN2B and induces cell cycle arrest in ESR1-positive breast cancer cells.
We recently found that DC-SCRIPT is a prognostic marker in breast cancer and a unique NR coregulator differentially regulating different classes of NRs.
In this study we aimed to validate the prognostic value of DC-SCRIPT mRNA expression in a large independent breast cancer cohort.
DC-SCRIPT mRNA levels were measured by real-time PCR in 1,505 primary invasive breast cancers and associated with outcome (disease-free survival (DFS), metastasis-free survival (MFS) and overall survival (OS)) using univariate and multivariable Cox regression analysis.
This study provides a higher level of evidence that DC-SCRIPT is indeed an independent, pure prognostic, factor for primary breast cancer and shows that DC-SCRIPT mRNA expression is most informative for either ESR1-positive and/or ESR2-low pT1 tumors.
We investigated the role of dendritic cell-specific transcript (DC-SCRIPT) as coregulator of these nuclear receptors and as a prognostic factor in breast cancer.
DC-SCRIPT expression in normal and tumor tissue from breast cancer patients was analyzed by polymerase chain reaction and immunohistochemistry.
The prognostic value of tumor DC-SCRIPT mRNA expression was assessed in three independent cohorts of breast cancer patients: a discovery group (n = 47) and a validation group (n = 97) (neither of which had received systemic adjuvant therapy) and in a tamoxifen-treated validation group (n = 68) by using a DC-SCRIPT to porphobilinogen deaminase transcript ratio cutoff of 0.15 determined in the discovery group.
DC-SCRIPT is a key regulator of nuclear receptor activity that has prognostic value in breast cancer.
Both SNP and gene-based analyses showed promising associations with breast cancer risk for 17 genes: OR10J3, FCER1A, NCF4, CNTNAP1, CTNNB1, KLKB1, ITGB2, ALOX12B, KLK2, IRAK3, KLK4, STAT6, NCF2, CCL1, C1QR1, MBP and NOS1.
When the data were divided by menopausal status, the optimal models to predict breast cancer, which included NAF hK2 or PSA and age, were 100% sensitive and 41% specific in pre- vs. 93% sensitive and 12% specific in postmenopausal women.
Several lines of evidence suggest that members of the kallikrein family are involved in various malignancies such as prostate (PSA, KLK2, KLK15), ovarian (KLK4, KLK5, KLK6, KLK8, KLK10), and breast cancer (KLK10, KLK13, KLK14).
We examined previously the steroid hormone regulation of 2 known androgen-regulated kallikreins, KLK3 (encoding PSA) and KLK2 (encoding human kallikrein 2 or hK2) in BT-474, T-47D, ZR75-1, MCF-7, MFM-223 and BT-20 human breast cancer cells and found that they were differentially regulated, with the cells showing variable responses to androgen.
Every breast cancer cell line exhibited a distinct expression pattern of the nuclear receptor co-regulators examined raising the possibility that the relative levels of these co-activators/-repressors might differentially modulate androgen receptor transcriptional activity within the promoter/enhancer region of KLK2 and KLK3 of these cells.
Like KLK2 and KLK3, the KLK5 gene is regulated by steroid hormones in the BT-474 breast cancer cell line.
KLK2 and KLK3 have important applications in prostate cancer diagnostics and, more recently, in breast cancer diagnostics.
Oligonucleotide 5'-SH-(A)(12)-AGACAAGAGAGG-3' (Oligo 1) modified AuNPs and oligonucleotide 5'-CAACAGAGAACG-(A)(12)-HS-3' (Oligo 2) modified AuNPs could hybridize with oligonulceotide 5'-CGTTCTCTGTTGCCTCTCTTGTCT-3' (Oligo 3), which resulted in the aggregation of Oligo-AuNPs probes, and triggered the increase of their average diameter.
To observe the effect of Bushen Huoxue Recipe (BHR) on inhibiting vascular calcification (VC) in chronic renal failure (CRF) rats by regulating BMP-2/Runx2/Osterix signal pathway, and to explore its possible mechanism.
Here, we report that inhibition of Src significantly reduced survival of H37Rv as well as multidrug-resistant (MDR) and extremely drug-resistant (XDR) strains of M. tuberculosis in THP-1 macrophages.
Src inhibition was also effective in controlling M. tuberculosis infection in guinea pigs.
In guinea pigs, reduced M. tuberculosis burden due to Src inhibition also led to a marked decline in the disease pathology.
We propose that Src inhibitors could be developed into effective host-directed anti-TB drugs, which could be indiscriminately used against both drug-sensitive and drug-resistant strains of M. tuberculosis.
We explored tyrosine kinase Src as a host factor exploited by virulent M. tuberculosis for intracellular survival.
We show that Src inhibition can effectively control tuberculosis in infected guinea pigs.
In the current study we aimed to find out the impact of cytokine-inducible Src homology 2 domain protein (CISH) gene polymorphisms on the risk of pulmonary tuberculosis (PTB) in a sample of Iranian population.
A recent multi-center case-control study identified several single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within the cytokine-inducible SRC homology 2 domain (CISH) gene that are associated with susceptibility to tuberculosis (TB) in both African and Asian populations.
Among them, the human Cytokine-inducible Src homology 2(SH2) domain protein (CISH) gene has been very recently reported to be involved in T cell activation and differentiation in response to Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection.
For the first time, we report different genetic anomalies between adult and paediatric BLs, suggesting age-related heterogeneity in Burkitt lymphomagenesis.
Although there are conflicting data regarding prognostic implications of isolated MYC aberrancy in these non-BLs, the co-occurrence of MYC rearrangements and either the antiapoptotic gene B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia/lymphoma 2 (BCL2) or the transcriptional repressor BCL6 leads to an entity termed double-hit B-cell lymphoma (DHL) (or triple-hit if all 3 abnormalities are observed) with a particularly poor prognosis and no established treatment paradigms.
The clinicopathologic findings in Burkitt lymphoma (BL) and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) may show significant overlap, and MYC abnormalities, found in all BLs, also occur in a subset of DLBCL.
Double negative cases were absent in the group of BLs but could be found in approximately one third of the remaining cases of mature aggressive B-cell lymphomas.
In particular, we determined the expression and production of several angiogenic factors including tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinases-1 (TIMP-1), Leptin, connective tissue growth factor (CTGF), meningioma-associated complimentary DNA (Mac25), basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF), and Midkine.
Altered expression levels of several genes identified in this study have been previously noted in meningiomas (eg, growth hormone receptor, IGFBP-7, endothelin receptor A, IGF2).
mac25, a retinoic acid-inducible gene that is expressed at high levels in senescent epithelial cells, was initially cloned as a gene that is differentially expressed in meningioma.
mac25 had previously been cloned as a discrete gene, preferentially expressed in normal, leptomeningial cells compared with meningioma tumors.
Outcome assessments included the Sheehan Panic Disorder Scale (SPS), Panic Disorder Severity Scale (PDSS), Bandelow Panic and Agoraphobia Scale (PAS), Hamilton Rating Scale for Anxiety (HAM-A), 21-point Clinician Global Improvement Scale (CGI-21), 21-point Patient Global Improvement (PGI-21) and the Sheehan Disability Scale (SDS).
Taken together, the results of the present study concluded that human FAT2 may function as a key molecule that governs not only PCP, but also NF2-Hpo signaling in arachnoid cells; thus, a mutation in this gene may result in spinal meningioma.
Eight human STS cell lines were used: fibrosarcoma (HT1080), liposarcoma (SW872, T778, MLS-402), synovial sarcoma (SW982, SYO1, 1273), and malignant fibrous histiocytoma (U2197).
VAE diminished the CI in most of the synovial sarcoma (SW982, SYO1) and liposarcoma (SW872, T778) cell lines as well as HT1080.
A total of eight different human STS cell lines were used in the study: Fibrosarcoma (HT1080), liposarcoma (SW872, T778 and MLS-402), synovial sarcoma (SW982, SYO1 and 1273) and pleomorphic sarcoma (U2197).
In SYO-1 synovial sarcoma xenografts, administration of small molecule Tcf/Beta-catenin complex inhibitors significantly reduced tumor growth, associated with diminished AXIN2 protein levels.
These plasmids were transfected in synovial sarcoma SYO-1 cells and we observed the expression of these proteins using a fluorescence microscope.
Furthermore, cell proliferation and colony formation of synovial sarcoma SYO-1 and YaFuSS cells were suppressed by exogenous tSSX expression.
Psoriasis area and severity index (PASI), serum P-selectin and interleukin (IL)-6 were monitored throughout the treatment.
We aimed to study the association of the endothelial activation biomarkers monocyte chemoattractant protein 1 (MCP-1), soluble (s) E-selectin and P-selectin with disease activity and severity in psoriasis patients treated with anti-TNF-Alfa therapy.
Plasma soluble P-selectin concentrations, PDMP and platelet aggregation were significantly elevated in patients with psoriasis, as compared to controls.
Most efficient among them is the newly identified SOXN (neuroblastoma-derived sulfhydryl oxidase), which comprises 12 exons and maps to 9q34.3.
These results identify SOXN as a major player in regulating the sensitization of neuroblastoma cells for IFN-gamma-induced apoptosis.
The cartilage proteins melanoma inhibitory activity (MIA) and human cartilage gp-39 (HC gp-39) are candidate autoantigens in rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
The presented results confirm expression of CDRAP by normal and osteoarthritic articular chondrocytes, but indicate that increased expression levels by chondrocytes are not the cause of the increased levels of CDRAP in the synovial fluid of patients with osteoarthritis.
We have measured the concentration of cartilage-derived retinoic-acid-sensitive protein (CD-RAP) in synovial fluid (SF) from the knees of 49 patients with osteoarthritis (OA) and 79 with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) in order to investigate the correlation between the type of joint disease and level of CD-RAP.
In this study, we demonstrated that osteopontin (OPN) was dramatically reduced by loss of TSC1/TSC2 complex in Tsc2-null mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs), rat uterine leiomyoma-derived Tsc2-deficient cells, genetically modified mouse TSC models, and clinical samples.
TSC2-deficient Eker rat uterine leiomyoma ELT3 cells were stably transfected with empty vector or plasmid for the expression of TSC2.
By analyzing Tsc2-null mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) and rat uterine leiomyoma-derived Tsc2-null ELT3 cells, we detected evidence for the involvement of cyclooxygenase 2 (COX2) as a downstream target of mTORC1 in the development of TSC tumors.
TSC2-positive and TSC2-negative mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEF), 323-TSC2-positive and 323-TSC2-null MEF and Eker rat uterine leiomyoma (ELT3) cells were treated with doxycycline or rapamycin alone, or in combination.
Importantly, rapamycin treatment did not affect the expression of AdPLA2 and the production of PGE2 by TSC2-deficient mouse embryonic fibroblast (Tsc2-/-MEFs), rat uterine leiomyoma-derived ELT3 cells, and LAM patient-associated renal angiomyolipoma-derived "mesenchymal" cells.
Loss of the Tuberous Sclerosis 2 (TSC2) tumor suppressor has been proposed as a mechanism important for the etiology of uterine leiomyomata based on the Eker rat model.
However, conflicting evidence showing increased TSC2 expression has been reported in human uterine leiomyomata, suggesting that TSC2 might not be involved in the pathogenesis of this disorder.
In cell culture models of TSC2-deficient LAM patient-derived and rat uterine leiomyoma-derived cells, we found that progesterone treatment or progesterone plus estradiol resulted in increased phosphorylation of Protein Kinase B (Akt) and Extracellular signal-regulated kinases1/2 (ERK1/2), induced the proliferation, and enhanced the migration and invasiveness.
We report here that expression of AlfaB-crystallin was upregulated in Tsc1-/- or Tsc2-/- mouse embryonic fibroblasts, Eker rat uterine leiomyoma-derived Tsc2-deficient ELT3 cells, mutant Tsc2-associated mouse kidney tumors, and human lung lymphangioleiomyomatosis nodules.
Female Eker rats harboring an insertional deletion in one copy of the tuberous sclerosis complex 2 (Tsc2) gene develop uterine leiomyoma, but the underlying mechanism of human uterine leiomyoma is not completely understood.
To examine whether down-regulation of tuberin, a TSC2 gene product, is present in human uterine leiomyoma, we analyzed leiomyoma and matched myometrium tissues from 22 Chinese patients with Western blotting and real-time polymerase chain reaction analyses, and found that the expression of tuberin was significantly increased in leiomyoma tissues compared with matched myometrium tissues with inhibition of both the mammalian target of rapacmycin pathway and mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways.
Cells derived from an Eker rat uterine leiomyoma (ELT3 cells) are Tsc2-null and these have been used in a rodent cell models for LAM.
In patients with rheumatoid arthritis, furin is reported to be highly expressed in the synovial pannus compared with healthy persons.
Inhibition of furin enhances invasive phenotype of synoviocytes from patients with rheumatoid arthritis, implying a protective role of furin.
Agents targeting upregulation of furin may have therapeutic potential for rheumatoid arthritis.
The effect of furin and its inhibitor Alfa1-PDX was tested in mice with collagen-induced arthritis (CIA).
Systemic administration of furin prevented increases in the arthritis score, joint destruction, and bone loss, in contrast to systemic administration of the furin inhibitor Alfa1-PDX, which enhanced these parameters.
They also suggest that Adamts5 induction in joint components other than cartilage, and its post-translational activation by PACE4 and/or furin may be important in the pathophysiology of arthritis.
When comparing the chorioamniotic membranes from women in spontaneous preterm labor with acute histologic chorioamnionitis to those without this placental lesion, we found that (1) the mRNA of NLR family pyrin domain-containing protein ( NLRP) 1, NLRP3, NLR family CARD domain-containing protein 4 ( NLRC4), and NOD2 were higher; (2) the NLRP3 protein was increased; (3) the mRNA and active form (p10) of CASP-1 were greater; (4) the mRNA and active form of CASP-4 were increased; (5) the mRNA and mature form of IL-1Beta were higher; (6) the mature form of IL-18 was elevated; and (7) ASC/CASP-1 complex formation was increased.
When comparing the chorioamniotic membranes from women in spontaneous labor at term with acute histologic chorioamnionitis to those without this placental lesion, we found that (1) the messenger RNA (mRNA) abundance of NLR family pyrin domain containing 3 ( NLRP3), NLR family CARD domain containing 4 ( NLRC4), absent in melanoma 2 ( AIM2), and nucleotide binding oligomerization domain 2 ( NOD2) was higher; (2) the NLRP3 and NLRC4 protein quantities were increased; (3) the mRNA and protein expressions of CASP-1 and its active forms were greater; (4) CASP-4 was increased at the mRNA level only; (5) the mRNA and protein expressions of IL-1Beta and its mature form were higher; and (6) a modest increase in the total protein concentration and abundance of the mature form of IL-18 was observed.
Mutations in NLRP7 (NOD-like-receptor family, pyrin domain containing 7) are responsible for a type of recurrent pregnancy loss known as recurrent hydatidiform mole (HYDM1).
NRG1 fusion-positive lung cancers have emerged as potentially actionable events in lung cancer but clinical support is currently limited and no evidence of efficacy of this approach in cancers beyond lung has been shown.
In patient 1 an SDC4-NRG1 gene fusion was detected, similar gene fusions having been described in lung cancers previously.
Unexpected molecular lesions of the NRG1 gene followed by an aberrant ErbB signaling were recently described as a new molecular features of non-small cell lung cancer, but it has been also sporadically reported in other tumors.
We highlight the current knowledge about the ErbB network and NRG1 deregulation in lung cancer and their merger into the ErbB/PI3K-AKT axis modulation and current therapeutic strategies.
More advances in knowledge of crosstalk between NRG1, ErbB3 and PI3K-AKT pathways may increase and strongly support the therapeutic choice for lung cancer patients.
All coding exons of SCN1B, GABRG2, and CACNB4 genes were screened for mutations in 38 SCN1A-mutation-positive SMEI probands.
Following the univariate analysis, high expressions of nuclear Beta-arrestin1 and p300 were classed as poor prognostic factors for both OS (P = .016) and DFS (P = .025).The expression of Beta-arrestin1 in the nucleus is associated with increased malignant tendency of lung adenocarcinoma, and the predictive value of Beta-arrestin1 may be optimized by combining information about the expression of p300 acetyltransferase.
Furthermore, we demonstrated that the activation of COX-2 expression by hnRNPA2/B1 was mediated through the cooperation with p300, a transcriptional co-activator, in NSCLC cells.
PPARGC1A and PPARGC1B) are key agents in the development and pathophysiology of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM).
Furthermore, eight of the 17 CpG sites reside in genes (FSTL1, SORCS2, NRF1, DLC1, PPARGC1B, CHN2, NXPH1) that have prior known associations with obesity, diabetes, and the insulin pathway.
No significant associations were found, although the top significant CpGs in boys were located in the LRPAP1, HAGH, PPARGC1B, KCNQ1 and KCNQ1DN genes, previously associated to birth weight, Type 2 diabetes, obesity or steroid hormone signaling.
We used a two-stage study design to evaluate whether variations in the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPAR) and the PPAR gamma co-activator 1 (PGC1) gene families (PPARA, PPARG, PPARD, PPARGC1A, and PPARGC1B) are associated with type 2 diabetes (T2D) risk.
A recently identified muscular dystrophy gene TOR1AIP1 was detected as a hub gene in dysferlinopathy.
TorsinA-interacting protein 1 (TOR1AIP1) gene is a novel gene that has recently been described to cause limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD) with mild dilated cardiomyopathy.
We report a family with mutations in TOR1AIP1 where the striking clinical feature is severe cardiac failure requiring cardiac transplant in two siblings, in addition to musculoskeletal weakness and muscular dystrophy.
These scientific contributions strengthen the role of LAP1 in DYT1 dystonia and muscular dystrophy.
Moreover, LAP1 also interacts with torsinA and emerin, proteins involved in DYT1 dystonia and X-linked Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy disorder, respectively.
Deletions encompassing TAK1-binding protein 2 (TAB2) associated with isolated and syndromic congenital heart defects.
Haploinsufficiency of TAB2 was recently implicated as a cause for a variety of congenital heart defects.
This is the smallest reported deletion involving TAB2 that segregates with congenital heart defects.
Findings from this family support a key role of TAB2 haploinsufficiency in congenital heart defects and expand the phenotypic spectrum of TAB2-microdeletion syndrome.
In addition, the present deletion is the smallest so far recorded in the 6q25 region encompassing eight known genes [vs. 41 of Bisgaard et al., and 23 of Caselli et al.,], including the TAB2 (likely responsible for the girl's congenital heart defect), LATS1 gene, and the UST gene (a regulator of the homeostasis of proteoglycans, which could have played a role in the abnormal dermal and cartilage elasticity).
The isozymes hPAD2 and hPAD4 have been implicated in the development and progression of several autoimmune diseases, including rheumatoid arthritis and multiple sclerosis.
Protein arginine deiminase 2 (PAD2) plays a key role in the onset and progression of multiple sclerosis, rheumatoid arthritis, and breast cancer.
The enzyme peptidylarginine deiminase 2 (PAD2) has been associated with inflammatory diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis and neurodegenerative diseases including multiple sclerosis.
Peptidylarginine deiminase 2 (PAD2) and peptidylarginine deiminase 4 (PAD4) are two members of PAD family which are over-expressed in the multiple sclerosis (MS) brain.
Recent studies have revealed that abnormal activation of PADI2, the gene for which is expressed throughout the nervous system, is likely to be related to the pathogenesis of neuropsychiatric diseases with neurodegenerative processes, such as Alzheimer's disease and multiple sclerosis.
Giant cell tumor of bone (GCTB) is a locally aggressive primary bone tumor that contains numerous osteoclasts formed from marrow-derived precursors through receptor activator of nuclear factor K-B ligand (RANKL), an osteoclast differentiation factor expressed in neoplastic cells of GCTB.
Clinically, RANKL inhibition improves bone-metastasis free survival in patients with prostate cancer and disease-free survival in patients with breast cancer.
VEGF-Flt-1 signaling induces osteoclastogenesis in OSCC through two possible ways: 1) VEGF produced from OSCC cells can directly stimulate the Flt-1 pathway in preosteoclasts to induce migration to future bone resorbing area and differentiation into osteoclasts, and 2) VEGF-Flt-1 signaling upregulates RANKL expression in OSCC cells, which indirectly leads to osteoclast differentiation.
Thus, the transcriptional targets normally activated by RANKL that promote a proliferative response in luminal progenitors can contribute to the susceptibility of mammary epithelial cells to BRCA1-mutated breast cancers as a consequence of DDR-induced NF-kappaB.
Our finding provides mechanistic support for a breast cancer chemoprevention trial with a RANKL inhibitor among high-risk premenopausal women with dense breasts.
The present study examined the effects of brucine on the OPG/RANKL/RANK signaling pathway for exploring the mechanism of brucine suppression of bone metastasis in breast cancer.
The goal of our study was to assess the prognostic impact of the necroptosis relative protein RIPK1 genetic polymorphism in ischemia-reperfusion injury and survival after hepatectomy in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) patients.
Here, we discuss our recent data on RIPK1 in liver injury and hepatocellular carcinoma development and put these into relation to previous experimental findings to underpin that it exerts opposing kinase-dependent and kinase independent functions in liver cells.
Moreover, loss of both Ripk1 and Traf2 in LPC not only resulted in caspase-8 hyperactivation but also impaired NF-KB activation, promoting the spontaneous development of hepatocellular carcinoma.
The single-stranded DNA cytidine deaminases APOBEC3B, APOBEC3H haplotype I, and APOBEC3A can contribute to cancer through deamination of cytosine to form promutagenic uracil in genomic DNA.
To study this, we developed a method to purify full length APOBEC3B and characterized it in comparison to APOBEC3A and APOBEC3H on substrates relevant to cancer mutagenesis.
A3H-I also associates with clonal TCA/T-biased mutations in lung adenocarcinoma suggesting this enzyme makes broader contributions to cancer mutagenesis.
These studies combine to suggest that A3B and A3H-I, together, explain the bulk of 'APOBEC signature' mutations in cancer.
TCGA data analyses revealed that expression of APOBEC3D and APOBEC3H also correlates with CD3D across multiple cancer types.
We found that the T allele of rs139293 in exon 2 of APOBEC3H was significantly associated with decreased risk of lung cancer (odds ratio = 0.76, 95% confidence interval: 0.63-0.91).
These results indicate that genetic variants in APOBEC3H may contribute to lung cancer susceptibility in Chinese population.
A 56-year-old male with cirrhosis presented with acute bleeding from cardiofundal gastroesophageal varices (GOV) and was treated with endoscopic cyanoacrylate glue.
At that time, he underwent retreatment with balloon-occluded retrograde obliteration (BRTO), with no recurrence at a follow-up of 14 months.Available treatments for bleeding GOV include methods to (a) directly obstruct the varices (endoscopic variceal ligation , sclerotherapy and cyanoacrylate glue, BRTO) or to (b) decrease portal pressure (surgical portacaval shunts; transportal intrahepatic portosystemic shunt).
Gastroesophageal varices (GOV) is a common complication in patients with portal hypertension.
Gastric varices were categorized as GOV-1 (3%), GOV-2 (61%), and isolated gastric varices type 1 (36%) per Sarin classification.
Of the 9 children with associated gastroeosophageal varices (GOV), the severity of lesions was reduced in 8 of them.
Here, we address the contribution of the EP3 receptor in dictating early outcomes after transient cerebral ischemia.
Following S1, separate scalp recordings in 4 patients in the epilepsy group displayed EP 3 times in the 'over 300 ms' time window.
Conversely, patients with endometriosis had significantly shortened activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) when compared to controls (1.08 +/- 0.06 and 1.12 +/- 0.19, respectively; P &lt; .01).
Activated partial thromboplastin time is shorter in women with endometriosis but still in the normal range.
Are the levels of total circulating cell-derived microparticles (cMPs) and circulating tissue factor-containing microparticles (cMP-TF) increased in patients with endometriosis?
Increased expression of tissue factor (a transmembrane receptor for Factor VII/VIIa) in eutopic and ectopic endometrium from patients with endometriosis has been described.
Tissue factor (TF) expression was elevated in endometriosis and TF concentrations were significantly elevated both in the supernatant of cultured primary endometriotic stromal cells and in peritoneal fluid from women with endometriosis.
Here, we first determined the value of ALCAM as a marker of recurrence in endometrioid endometrial cancer by conducting a retrospective multicentre study of 174 primary tumours.
Then we demonstrated in vitro a role for ALCAM in cell migration and invasion by using a loss-of-function model in two endometrial cancer cell lines.
In conclusion, our results highlight the potential of ALCAM as a recurrent biomarker in early-stage endometrioid endometrial cancer and point to ALCAM as an important molecule in endometrial cancer dissemination by regulating cell migration, invasion, and metastasis.
Overexpressing miR-378 in ovarian cancer cells altered expression of genes associated with angiogenesis (ALCAM, EHD1, ELK3, TLN1), apoptosis (RPN2, HIPK3), and cell cycle regulation (SWAP-70, LSM14A, RDX).
Activated leukocyte cell adhesion molecule (ALCAM) is expressed at the surface of epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) cells and is released in a soluble form (sALCAM) by ADAM-17-mediated shedding.
Here, we show that serum sALCAM levels were significantly higher in epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) (p &lt; 0.005) than in controls.
To date there are no data on the role of ALCAM in cervical cancer available.
In this study, ALCAM expression was analysed by immunohistochemistry (IHC) in tissue samples of 233 patients with cervical cancer, among them 178 with complete follow-up information.
ALCAM overexpression was detected (immunoreactive score (IRS) 2-12) in 58.4% of the cervical cancer samples.
ESs and USTSs were further separated by CD166 staining, wherein increased expression was associated with ES (P &lt; 0.0001).
USP22 is one of the important targets for inhibiting tumor growth, but clear illustration regarding its effects of telomerase, tumor cell immortality and retinoblastoma cell aging or apoptosis via suppressing TERT/P53 signal pathway remains to be elusive.
USP22 played an important role in retinoblastoma cell proliferation/aging and apoptosis.
The reduction of USP22 expression facilitated human retinoblastoma cell aging or apoptosis via suppressing TERT/P53 signal pathway.
USP22, thus, may work as a target for treating retinoblastoma.
The present study aimed to investigate the correlation of ubiquitin-specific peptidase 22 (USP22) with acquired resistance to cisplatin in lung adenocarcinoma.
USP22 is a potential target in cisplatin-resistant lung adenocarcinoma and should be considered in future therapeutic practice.
Ubiquitin specific peptidase 22 (USP22), a putative cancer stem cell marker, is overexpressed in liver metastases of colorectal cancer (CRC).
In this study, we explored the functional role of USP22 in modulating c-Myc stability and its physiological relevance in breast cancer progression.
We found that USP22 promotes deubiquitination of c-Myc in several breast cancer cell lines, resulting in increased levels of c-Myc.
Furthermore, overexpression of USP22 stimulates breast cancer cell growth and colony formation, and increases c-Myc tumorigenic activity.
In conclusion, the present study reveals that USP22 in breast cancer cell lines increases c-Myc stability through c-Myc deubiquitination, which is closely correlated with breast cancer progression.
In this study, we investigated the effects of the deubiquitinating enzyme USP22 on the expression of the drug-resistance genes BMI1 and EZH2 in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and on prognosis.
Ubiquitin-specific protease 22 (USP22) aberrance has been implicated in several malignancies; however, whether USP22 plays a role in anaplastic thyroid carcinoma (ATC) remains unclear.
Curcumin might have therapeutic potential in breast cancer through regulating breast cancer-related genes, including SERPINE1, PGAP3, MAP3K1, MAPK1, GSTO2, VIM, SPARC, and FGF2.
Our data showed that the level of CENPE, BAG2, SOD2, GDI2, CORO1C, CFL1, DSTN, CALD1, PHGDH, PDHA1, AKR1B1, TST and TBCA proteins were significantly up-regulated in the fibroblasts co-cultured with ovarian cancer cells, whereas HSPB1, P4HB and VIM were significantly down-regulated.
Previously, using systems biology approach and cancer signaling networks, we identified top-5 highly expressed and connected proteins (HSP90AB1, CSNK2B, TK1, YWHAB and VIM) in the invasive MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cell line.
MiR-208b was also upregulated in DCM patients, but not in heart failure patients due to ischemic heart disease or myocarditis.
Elevated cAMP levels increased cell size and altered expression levels of cardiac genes and micro-RNAs associated with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), including Myh6, Myh7, Myh7b, Tnni3, Anp, Bnp, Gata4, Mef2c, Mef2d, Nfatc1, miR208a, and miR208b.
The aim of this study was to determine whether miR-208, miR-208b, and miR-499 are expressed with MHC mRNA in human dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), and whether these levels are related to left ventricular (LV) function and to clinical outcomes.
The goal of this study was to examine the long-term effects of maternal postpartum corticosterone (CORT, a model of postpartum depression) and concurrent FLX on hippocampal neurogenesis in male and female offspring.
Using high-resolution magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), the present pilot study examined the relationship between morning serum cortisol, DHEA(S), and HCV in nineteen normal controls and eighteen unmedicated subjects with Major Depressive Disorder (MDD).
To assess the association of neural development-related genes LIS1and TSNAX with bipolar disorder in a Chinese Han population.
Our results indicated that LIS1 and TSNAX genes are not associated with susceptibility to bipolar I disorder in Chinese Han population.
The translin-associated factor X gene (TSNAX)/disrupted-in-schizophrenia-1 gene (DISC1) has been associated with psychiatric disorders, including schizophrenia, MDD and bipolar disorder.
Several investigations have reported that the translin-associated factor X gene (TSNAX)/disrupted-in-schizophrenia-1 gene (DISC1) was associated with major psychiatric disorders including schizophrenia, bipolar disorder (BP), and major depressive disorder (MDD).
The Translin-associated factor X/Disrupted in Schizophrenia 1 (TRAX/DISC) region was first implicated as a susceptibility locus for schizophrenia by analysis of a large Scottish family in which a t(1;11) translocation cosegregates with schizophrenia, bipolar disorder and recurrent major depression.
Two further regions, one in TRAX and the second in DISC1, showed weaker evidence for sex-specific associations of individual haplotypes with bipolar disorder in men and women respectively, P&lt;0.01.
Compared with non-CKD controls, mice with CKD had downregulated expression of GSTA4 at the mRNA and protein levels, with concomitant increase in 4-HNE in arteries and veins.
The data showed age-related upregulation of downstream signaling molecules such as mitogen activated protein kinases (MAPKs), activator protein-1 (AP-1), NF-KB, and COX-2 in a cell culture cell system.Taken together, the results of this study show that the formation of adducts between 4-HNE and Src activates inflammatory signaling pathways in the aged kidney, contributing to age-related nephropathy.
Elevated plasma 4-HNE has been associated with renal failure, septic shock and cardiopulmonary bypass surgery.
Additionally, the effect of PlGF (inhibition) on IOP was investigated, since aqueous PlGF is known to be upregulated in glaucoma patients.
Inhibition of PlGF also might open alternative perspectives as IOP-lowering strategy for glaucoma patients with increased aqueous PlGF levels.
To evaluate changes in the concentrations of placental growth factor (PlGF) and vascular endothelial growth factor-A (VEGF-A) in aqueous humor of patients with neovascular glaucoma (NVG) before and after an intravitreal injection of ranibizumab (IVR) and to determine the underlying correlation between the levels.
ELISA experiments showed that PlGF levels were significantly increased in aqueous humour of glaucoma patients and after VEGF treatment, which may indicate an important contribution of this growth factor to wound healing after trabeculectomy.
Using a mouse model of glaucoma filtration surgery, we were able to show that intracameral injection of a previously characterized anti-PlGF antibody (ThromboGenics NV) significantly improved surgical outcome by increasing bleb survival and bleb area.
The 17-phenyl PGF(2Alfa) analogue bimatoprost (10a) is the most efficacious ocular hypotensive agent currently available for the treatment of glaucoma or ocular hypertension.
Latanoprost, a synthetic derivative of the natural prostaglandin F(2a) (PGF(2a)), is a powerful antiglaucoma agent with ocular hypotensive and neuroprotective effects.
Endotoxaemia enhanced early VT occurs in a TLR-4 and ICAM-1 dependent fashion, and is potentiated by neutropenia.
The aim of this study was to investigate the mannose-binding lectin 2 (MBL-2), interleukin (IL)-4, Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR-4), angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE), chemokine receptor 5 (CCR-5), and IL-1 receptor antagonist (RA) gene polymorphisms (GPs) in acute leukemias (ALs) and to evaluate their roles in febrile neutropenia (FN) resulting from chemotherapy.
In a multivariate analysis, adjusted for occurrence of graft-versus-host-disease, Cytomegalovirus serostatus and duration of neutropenia, paired presence of the TLR4 1063A&gt;G and IFNG 874T&gt;A single nucleotide polymorphisms showed a trend towards increased susceptibility to invasive aspergillosis (p = 0.04).
Four SNPs in the TLR4 gene (rs10759931, rs11536889, rs1927911 and rs6478317) were associated with an increased risk of developing chemotherapy-induced neutropenia, each sustaining correction for multiple testing.
The rs1064395 single nucleotide polymorphism, within the gene encoding neurocan (NCAN), is reported to be associated with schizophrenia in European populations and may influence brain structure in patients with schizophrenia.
In this study, we aimed to explore whether NCAN rs1064395 confers some risk for schizophrenia and cognitive dysfunction in Han Chinese.
The A allele of the single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs1064395 in the NCAN gene has recently been identified as a susceptibility factor for bipolar disorder and schizophrenia.
Recently, it was shown that some CSPGs members like aggrecan, versican, and neurocan were strongly involved in brain disorders like bipolar disorder (BD), schizophrenia, and ADHD.
Recent studies have provided strong evidence that variation in the gene neurocan (NCAN, rs1064395) is a common risk factor for bipolar disorder (BD) and schizophrenia.
In this work, authors investigated the association between previously confirmed bipolar disorder genetic risk factor- neurocan with schizophrenia in a population sample of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
A case-control analysis of common genetic polymorphism within neurocan gene and schizophrenia status in a consecutively sampled patient cohort have been done using Fisher-exact test with odds-ratio calculation.
Our data suggest that genetic variation in NCAN is a common risk factor for BD and schizophrenia.
In contrast, studies have associated primary biliary cirrhosis and primary sclerosing cholangitis with genes encoding major histocompatibility complex proteins and identified loci associated with microbial sensing and immune regulatory pathways outside this region, such as genes encoding IL12, STAT4, IRF5, IL2 and its receptor (IL2R), CD28, and CD80.
In this condition, 8CR inhibited edema and myonecrosis induced by the sPLA2 activity of Crotalus durissus terrificus in a dose-dependent manner by decreasing interleukin-1Beta (IL-1Beta), tumor necrosis factor Alfa (TNF-Alfa), prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), and lipid peroxidation.
In addition, it was shown that Crotalus durissus terrificus sPLA2 increases cell oxidative stress during edema and myonecrosis, and the antioxidant properties of the polyphenolic compound may be significant in mitigating the pharmacological effect induced by sPLA2 and other snake venom toxins.
Therefore, it's necessary to express CssPLA2 in water-soluble form and determine whether the enzymatic activity of CssPLA2 or cell signalling pathways is involved in liver fibrosis caused by clonorchiasis.
We sought to investigate if mast cell activation and increases in secretory sPLA2s are associated with an increase in PAF and occurrence of dengue haemorrhagic fever (DHF).
The changes in the levels of mast cell tryptase, PAF and the activity of sPLA2 were determined throughout the course of illness in 13 adult patients with DHF, and 30 patients with dengue fever (DF).
The difference in serum levels of PLA2G2A was analyzed among chronic hepatitis B (CHB), LC, and HCC patients.
We have previously shown that secreted phospholipases A2 (sPLA2s) from animal venoms inhibit the in vitro development of Plasmodium falciparum, the agent of malaria.
In addition, the inflammatory-type human group IIA (hGIIA) sPLA2 circulates at high levels in the serum of malaria patients.
Together, our findings indicate that 4 human sPLA2s are active against P. falciparum in vitro and pave the way to future investigations on their in vivo contribution in malaria pathophysiology.
Two subtypes of phospholipases A2 (PLA2s) with the ability to induce myonecrosis, 'Asp49' and 'Lys49' myotoxins, often coexist in viperid snake venoms.
In order to assess the contribution of the IL-18 to susceptibility to Chronic Chagas Disease, we investigated the association between a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) located in the IL-18 gene with the risk of developing Chagas cardiomyopathy.
We analyzed the rs2043055 marker in the IL18 gene in a cohort of Chagas disease cardiomyopathy patients (n=849) and asymptomatic subjects (n=202).
To describe a peculiar flecked-retina phenotype in a young female affected by early-onset retinal dystrophy due to a heterozygous mutation in the cone-rod transcription factor CRX gene.
We identified a novel early-onset retinal dystrophy-related heterozygous CRX mutation associated with early and severe rod and cone dysfunction and regressive flecked-retina appearance on ophthalmoscopy.
We found that retinal disease-related genes were efficiently detected in CRX-transduced cells, most of which are crucial to photoreceptor functions.
Moreover, by modification of the culture conditions including additional transduction of RAX1 and NEUROD1, we found a greater variety of retinal disease-related genes than that observed in CRX-transduced PBMCs.
These data suggest that CRX acts as a master control gene for reprogramming PBMCs into photoreceptor-like cells and that our induced photoreceptor-like cells might contribute to individualized drug screening and disease modeling of inherited retinal degeneration.
These results indicated that rs11134527 in pri-miR-218-2 and rs531564 in pri-miR-124-1 could be associated with CIN and cervical cancer in the Chinese Han population.
Finally, anisomycin was the highest correlation with DEGs.MiR-124a might be involved in the pathogenesis of hypertension via targeting Ebf3 and Rgs7 bp, which possibly represent a novel and effective strategy for treatment of hypertension.
The serum miR-124 expression levels in 114 osteosarcoma patients, 40 periostitis patients and 50 normal controls were detected using real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR).
The level of serum miR-124 was remarkably decreased in osteosarcoma patients when compared to periostitis patients and healthy controls (both p&lt; 0.05).
Moreover, the Kaplan-Meier method with log-rank test showed that osteosarcoma patients with lower serum miR-124 levels had unfavorable 5 year overall survival and disease free survival rates.
It was also demonstrated that miR-124-3p expression was positively associated with mTOR signaling and this relationship was dependent on the tuberous sclerosis proteins 1/2 complex.
Among these microRNAs, miR-142-3p/5p and miR-146a expression was found to be significantly increased in MPA-treated lupus CD4(+)T cells compared to untreated controls.
To examine the role of microRNA-142-3p/5p (miR-142-3p/5p) in the development of autoimmunity in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).
To establish the cytologic and immunocytochemical features of lymphangioleiomyomatosis (LAM) cell clusters (LCCs) and to clarify its diagnostic significance for LAM.
This study aimed to evaluate fibrosis and elastin destruction in childhood interstitial lung disease (chILD) patients.
Inhibitors of the cGMP-degrading phosphodiesterase (PDE) 5 have achieved blockbuster status in the treatment of penile erectile dysfunction (PED).
To compare the effectiveness of the phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitor (PDE-5i) tadalafil alone and in combination with a biologically active dietary supplement (BADS) NeyroDoz, containing the precursors of serotonin in patients with erectile dysfunction (ED) associated with secondary premature ejaculation (SPE).
Of these enzymes, PDE5 has attracted a special attention over the years after its recognition as being the target enzyme in treating erectile dysfunction.
Phosphodiesterase (PDE) 5 inhibitor induced muscle relaxation in corporal smooth muscle cells and was used to treat erectile dysfunction by inhibiting cGMP degradation.
Cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP)-specific phosphodiesterase (PDE) inhibitors are hypothesized to improve cognition in schizophrenia and Alzheimer disease by increasing cGMP levels in certain brain regions.
To find out whether increased spinal nociception represents a premotor feature, experimental pain sensitivity was assessed in idiopathic REM-sleep behavior disorder (IRBD) patients with or without signs of a neurodegenerative disorder compared to early Parkinson's disease (ePD) patients and healthy controls (HC).
Phosphodiesterase (PDE) inhibitors are currently under evaluation as agents that may facilitate the improvement of cognitive impairment associated with Alzheimer's disease.
Notably, much experimental and clinical evidence show that PXR senses xenobiotics and triggers the detoxification response to prevent diseases such as diabetes, obesity, intestinal inflammatory diseases and liver fibrosis.
Rescued Tg(INV-Cst6)Cst6ichq/ichq mice survive the neonatal phase, but display severe eye pathology and alopecia after 4 mo.
Intriguingly, both Cst6(-/-)Ctsl(-/-) and Cst6(-/-)Ctsl(+/-) mice were viable, but the absence of cystatin M/E caused scarring alopecia in adult animals.
Transcription factor 4 (TCF-4) was recently identified as a candidate gene for the cause of type 2 diabetes, although the mechanisms have not been fully elucidated.
Collectively, these observations demonstrate a disease-promoting role of E2-2 dependent pDCs in the pancreas during autoimmune diabetes in the NOD mouse.
Fecal incontinence and constipation still remain the major complications after procedures for anorectal malformations (ARMs).
Numerous patients with anorectal malformations (ARMs) continue to experience fecal incontinence and constipation following surgical procedures.
Over the last two decades, advances in laparoscopic surgery and minimally invasive techniques have transformed the operative management of neonatal colorectal surgery for conditions such as anorectal malformations (ARMs) and Hirschsprung's disease.
This review describes these advances and outlines the main minimally invasive techniques currently used for management of ARMs and Hirschsprung's disease.
Further analysis of the PRKAG3 signaling pathway may provide insights into muscle physiology as well as the pathogenesis of noninsulin-dependent diabetes mellitus in humans, a metabolic disorder associated with impaired glycogen synthesis.
In primates, a PGBD3 element inserted into the Cockayne syndrome group B (CSB) gene over 43 Mya serves as an alternative 3' terminal exon, enabling the CSB gene to generate both full length CSB and a conserved CSB-PGBD3 fusion protein that joins an N-terminal CSB domain to the C-terminal transposase domain.
The CSB-PGBD3 fusion protein arose more than 43 million years ago when a 2.5-kb piggyBac 3 (PGBD3) transposon inserted into intron 5 of the Cockayne syndrome Group B (CSB) gene in the common ancestor of all higher primates.
Our data suggest that the CSB-PGBD3 fusion protein is important in both health and disease, and could play a role in Cockayne syndrome.
In this study, we searched for cerebral MBs in cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL), a unique type of small-vessel disease caused by mutations in the Notch3 gene.
Our purposes were (1) to determine the frequency, extent, and pattern of MBs in CADASIL; (2) to analyze the relationship between MBs and T2-hyperintense lesions; and (3) to evaluate the histopathology of brain tissue affected by MBs.
Focal areas of signal loss on gradient-echo images suggesting past MBs were found in 11 CADASIL individuals (69%) and no control subjects (P&lt;0.001).
The average number of MBs was 5.9+/-7.3 (range, 0 to 22) in individual CADASIL patients.
This study shows a high frequency and multiplicity of MBs in individuals with CADASIL.
At stimulation, the tubulovesicles fuse with the apical canaliculi and the HK-ATPase is incorporated into the apical membrane where it actively pumps H ions in exchange for K. Acute infection with Helicobacter pylori results in hypochlorhydria, whereas chronic infection can cause either hypo- or hyperchlorhydria, depending on the distribution of the infection and the degree of corpus gastritis.
The results directly confirm that the gastric H+/K(+)-ATPase is the causative autoantigen in the genesis of autoimmune gastritis.
We conclude that the beta subunit of the gastric H/K ATPase is a major T cell target in autoimmune gastritis and that thymic expression of a single autoantigen can abrogate an autoimmune response to multiple autoantigens.
8 cases of pneumophathia osteoplastica (ppo) of branching type observed at patients having no vascular deformities and one case of a focal ppo at a patient with mitral stenosis are reported.
Silencing CDKN3 expression could inhibit the ability of cell proliferation and migration, and overexpression of CDKN3 could restore the effects induced by YY1 overexpression in pancreatic cancer cells.
The expression levels of YY1 and CDKN3 were negatively correlated in pancreatic cancer tissues and PDAC patients with higher levels of CDKN3 have poor prognosis.
Vitro and vivo study show that CDKN3 can form a complex with MdM2-P53, thus leading to inhibiting the expression of P21, which is the target gene of P53, and finally facilitates the cell cycle to promote the proliferation of pancreatic cancer cells.
Hence, YY1 can directly regulate the expression of CDKN3 and participate in the cycle of pancreatic cancer cells, which can inhibit the progression of pancreatic cancer.
These results reveal that YY1-CDKN3-MDM2/P53-P21 axis is involved in pancreatic tumorigenesis, which may develop new methods for human pancreatic cancer therapy.
CDKN3 is often overexpressed in human cancer, and this overexpression correlates with reduced survival in several types of cancer.
The mechanism of CDKN3 overexpression and the role of CDKN3 transcript variants in human cancer are not entirely clear.
Besides the full-length CDKN3 encoding transcript and a major transcript that skips exon 2 express in normal and cancer cells, minor aberrant transcript variants have been reported.
Aberrant CDKN3 transcripts were postulated to encode dominant-negative inhibitors of CDKN3 as an explanation for overexpression of the perceived tumor suppressor gene in human cancer.
However, while CDKN3 is often overexpressed in human cancer, aberrant CDKN3 transcripts occur infrequently and at lower levels.
CDKN3 mutations and copy number alternation are rare in human cancer, implying that neither loss of CDKN3 activity nor constitutive gain of CDKN3 expression offer an advantage to tumorigenesis.
Given that rapidly growing tumors have more mitotic cells, the high level of mitotic CDKN3 expression is the most plausible mechanism of frequent CDKN3 overexpression in human cancer.
This finding clarifies the mechanism of CDKN3 overexpression in human cancer and questions the view of CDKN3 as a tumor suppressor.
Abnormal expression of CDKN3 has been found in numerous types of cancer.
Since it is unclear whether CDKN3 participates in the development of human gastric cancer, this study assessed the association between CDKN3 expression and cell biological function and demonstrated the clinical significance and prognosis of CDKN3 in human gastric cancer.
In this study, we found that CDKN3 showed a high expression in 35 paired human gastric cancer tissues and was correlated with poor patient survival, AJCC clinical staging, and recurrence.
Silencing of CDKN3 in human gastric cancer cells can significantly reduce proliferation, migration, invasion, and adhesion abilities.
Also, silencing of CDKN3 in human gastric cancer cells can induce G0-G1 cell cycle arrest and apoptosis.
Detection of cell cycle marker expression showed that CDKN3 knockdown promotes cell cycle arrest by decreasing the expression of CDK2, CDC25A, CCNB1, and CCNB2 in human gastric cancer cells.
The results of this study will help elucidate the oncogene function of CDKN3 in human gastric cancer.
However, whether CDKN3 is a potential therapeutic target for breast cancer remains to be elucidated.
The present in vitro study aimed to investigate the potential roles of CDKN3 in breast cancer.
Breast cancer cell lines were used to detect CDKN3 expression, and CDKN3 expression was silenced to investigate its role in cell apoptosis, cell cycle arrest and migration.
These results suggest that CDKN3 acts as an oncogene during breast cancer progression.
CDKN3 may therefore be considered a potential target for the treatment of breast cancer.
Paradoxically, CDKN3 is often overexpressed in human cancer.
We analysed CDKN3 expression and its association with patient survival in three cohorts of lung adenocarcinoma.
We also examined CDKN3 mutations in the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and the Moffitt Cancer Center's Total Cancer Care (TCC) projects.
CDKN3 transcripts were further analysed in a panel of cell lines and lung adenocarcinoma tissues.
CDKN3 is overexpressed in non small cell lung cancer.
High CDKN3 expression is associated with poor overall survival in lung adenocarcinoma.
CDKN3 overexpression is prognostic of poor overall survival in lung adenocarcinoma.
CDKN3 overexpression in lung adenocarcinoma is not attributed to alternative splicing or mutation but is likely due to increased mitotic activity, arguing against CDKN3 as a tumour suppressor.
The cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 3 (CDKN3) gene, involved in mitosis, is upregulated in cervical cancer (CC).
The aim of this study is to investigate the possible mechanisms of silence of CDKN3 exerting the suppressive role on epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC).
Functional studies showed that silence of CDKN3 inhibited cancer cell proliferation by promoting cell cycle progression in G1 phase, decreased cell invasion and promoted EOC cells apoptosis.
These findings indicated that CDKN3 might serve as a useful potential target for treatment of ovarian cancer.
We first discovered the pro-tumor effect of a controversial cell cycle regulator, cylin-dependent kinase inhibitor 3 (CDKN3), which is highly expressed in colorectal cancer, and the possible related signaling pathways, by bioinformatics tools.
We found that CDKN3 had remarkable effects in suppressing colorectal cancer cell proliferation and migration, inducing cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in a colorectal cancer cell line, SW480 cells.
Our study, for the first time, provided consistent evidence showing overexpression of cell cycle regulator CDKN3, in colorectal cancer.
The in vitro studies in SW480 cells revealed a unique role of CDKN3 in regulating cellular behavior of colorectal cancer cells, and implied the possibility of targeting CDKN3 as a novel treatment for colorectal cancer.
Using in situ hybridization, the expression of key clock genes, including period circadian protein homolog (Per) 1 and 2, cryptochrome 1 (Cry1), circadian locomoter output cycles protein kaput (Clock), brain and muscle ARNT-like protein 1 (Bmal1) and casein kinase 1Epsilon (CK1Epsilon) were retrospectively examined in 51 cases of colorectal carcinoma and 10 cases of adenoma.
The present study demonstrated that the protein expression levels of human circadian locomoter output cycles protein kaput (hCLOCK) is significantly increased, while miR-124 is attenuated in high-grade human CRC tissues and in the more invasive colorectal cancer cell lines SW620 and LOVO.
The CLOCK gene may be designated as a novel candidate for targeted gene therapy in drug-resistant ovarian cancer.
Study distribution by tumor was as follows: breast cancer (n=15), prostate cancer (n=3), pancreatic cancer (n=2), non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (n=2), glioma (n=1), chronic lymphocytic leukemia (n=1), colorectal cancer (n=1), non-small cell lung cancer (n=1) and ovarian cancer (n=1).We identified 10 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) significantly associated with cancer risk: NPAS2 rs10165970 (mixed and breast cancer shiftworkers), rs895520 (mixed), rs17024869 (breast) and rs7581886 (breast); CLOCK rs3749474 (breast) and rs11943456 (breast); RORA rs7164773 (breast and breast cancer postmenopausal), rs10519097 (breast); RORB rs7867494 (breast cancer postmenopausal), PER3 rs1012477 (breast cancer subgroups) and assessed the level of quality evidence to be intermediate.
We summarize fifteen epidemiological studies, including five studies on shift work that have indicated BMAL1, BMAL2, CLOCK, NPAS2, CRY1, CRY2, PER1, PER3 and TIMELESS as a candidate breast cancer risk variants.
This study sought to determine TANK (rs1921310, rs3820998) gene polymorphism in patients suffering from chronic periodontitis and peri-implantitis among an Iranian population.
The tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor family member-associated nuclear factor-KB (NF-KB) activator (TANK) takes part in the tumor necrosis factor-Alfa (TNF-Alfa)-mediated NF-KB signaling pathway and the interferon (IFN)-induction pathways that have relevance to HBV-related liver disease.
These results indicate that treatment with TUDCA may be helpful to counteract obesity-induced hyperinsulinemia through increasing insulin clearance, likely through enhanced liver IDE expression in a mechanism dependent on S1PR2-Insulin pathway activation.
Insulin-degrading enzyme (IDE) is a ubiquitous zinc peptidase of the inverzincin family, which has been initially discovered as the enzyme responsible for insulin catabolism; therefore, its involvement in the onset of diabetes has been largely investigated.
Impairment of the insulin-degrading enzyme (IDE) is associated with obesity and type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM).
Several mechanisms have been reported underlying the association of the two disorders, diabetes and dementia, one among which is the insulin-degrading enzyme (IDE) which is known to degrade insulin as well beta-amyloid peptides.
We concluded that vitamin D3 ameliorated insulin resistance and hyperinsulinemia in diabetic rat model received HFW through reduction of IDE and activation of insulin receptor phosphorylation.
Independently, the same approach identified a second homozygous truncating GZF1 variant in another multiplex consanguineous family affected by severe myopia, retinal detachment, and milder skeletal involvement.
Subgroup analyses found that the IL4RA I50V polymorphism was significantly associated with asthma risk in Asians (OR = 1.72, 95% CI 1.31-2.25, P&lt;0.0001), pediatric asthma risk (OR = 1.50, 95% CI 1.13-1.99, P = 0.005), and atopic asthma risk (OR = 1.88, 95% CI 1.27-2.79, P = 0.002).
To verify the association of transforming growth factor-beta1(TGF-beta1) (C-509T and T869C), CD14 (C-159T), IL-4 (C-590T), IL-4R (ILe50Val) and ADAM33 (S_2) gene polymorphisms with asthma severity in a sample of patients with mild, moderate and severe persistent atopic asthma.
To investigate the correlation between Chlamydia pneumonia (Cpn) infection and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
Chlamydia pneumoniae (Cpn) infection may play a role in the pathogenesis of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
To determine the possible association between Chlamydiae pneumoniae (Cpn) infection and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
The objective of the study was to investigate the possible association of Chlamydia pneumoniae (Cpn) in acute exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients.
Reading this article will familiarize the reader with (1) the unique chlamydial intracellular life cycle and the propensity for human chlamydial infections to become persistent and to result in immunopathologic (inflammatory) damage in target organs and (2) current evidence linking Chlamydia pneumoniae (Cpn) infection to obstructive lung diseases (asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, COPD).
Although the full clinical significance of these Cpn-obstructive lung disease associations remains to be established, reports of asthma improvement after treatment of Cpn infection deserve further investigation.
Taken together, we conclude that EGFR TKIs enhance the sensitivity of NSCLC cells to vATPase inhibitors by decreasing Hif-1Alfa/Bnip3 expression.
We found a significant upregulation of BNIP3 in human lung cancer datasets, and we identified a direct association between BNIP3 expression and survival rate of lung cancer patients.
In this study we used 115 NSCLC tissues to examine the immunohistochemical expression of four distinct molecules - the major regulator of autophagy Beclin 1, the anti-apoptotic and anti-autophagic protein Bcl-2, the pro-apoptotic and pro-autophagic protein BNIP3, and a marker of hypoxia and glucolysis, the glucose transporter Glut 1.
In conclusion, the accelerated autophagic status in NSCLC is unrelated to Beclin 1 and BNIP3 expression, but does show significant association with Bcl-2 reactivity.
This study was designed to determine the pattern and correlation between expression of the HIF-1Alfa transcriptional targets TGM2 and BNIP3 in laryngeal cancer, and investigate the association of BNIP3 and TGM2 with clinical outcome in laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) patients receiving postoperative radiotherapy.
Considering tumors with telomere shortening, expression for BNIP3, DAPK1, NDRG1, EGFR, and CDKN2A was significantly higher in NSCLC than in CRC, whereas TP53 was overexpressed in CRC with respect to NSCLC.
KIAA0513 was previously identified as upregulated in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex of subjects with schizophrenia by microarray analysis.
Genome-wide association studies have resulted in the identification of the FTO gene as an important genetic determinant of diabetes mellitus.
Furthermore, miR-130b-DEX significantly reduced expression of PPAR-Gamma downstream factor perilipin 1 as well as adipogenesis genes fatty acid synthase, acetyl coenzyme A carboxylase, 11Beta hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 and fat mass and obesity-associated gene, whereas expression as well as enzyme activity of adipose triglyceride lipase and hormone-sensitive lipase were greatly increased.
Higher fasting glucose levels may amplify obesity-risk in FTO carriers and lead to an exaggerated weight gain over time.
Type 2 diabetes-associated genes TCF7L2 and FTO; and a miRNA, miR21 were further investigated in another B12-supplementation cohort.
Recent studies show that FTO single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are associated with obesity and type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM).
The FTO gene is associated with type-2 diabetes (T2D) and increased fat mass.
A significant association was found between the perilipin rs1052700 polymorphism and T2D, and between the FTO rs3751812 polymorphism and obesity (P = 0.03 and 0.003, respectively); however, no significant relationship was found between rs3751812 and T2D.
The FTO rs3751812 polymorphism is a major genetic determinant of obesity, but not T2D.
Recent studies have implicated the FTO gene in child and adult obesity.
Variants (rs1558902, rs1121980, rs9939609, and rs9941349) in the fat mass and obesity-associated (FTO) gene exhibited strong but ethnicity-independent association with obesity.
We showed that: (1) there was a significant association between the biased usage of IGHV4-34 (binds to the carbohydrate I/i antigens) and inactivating mutation of TNFAIP3 [encoding a global negative regulator of the canonical nuclear factor-KB (NF-KB) pathway] in ocular adnexal MALT lymphoma; (2) IGHV1-69 was significantly overrepresented (54%) in MALT lymphoma of the salivary gland, but was not associated with mutation in any of the 17 genes investigated; and (3) MALT lymphoma lacked mutations that are frequently seen in other B-cell lymphomas characterized by constitutive NF-KB activities, including mutations in CD79B, CARD11, MYD88, TNFRSF11A, and TRAF3.
Therefore, we aim to assess the correlation of endothelin-1 concentrations with the development and severity of knee osteoarthritis (OA).
Together, the results here demonstrate that the febrile response in zymosan-induced arthritis in rats depends on the centrally acting pyrogenic cytokines TNF-Alfa, IL-1Beta, and IL-6, but does not depend on either CRF or ET-1.
Antibodies to AQP4 and AQP1 are detected in neuromyelitis optica and are believed to play a pathogenic role.
Among thirteen different mammalian AQPs, AQP1 and AQP4 have been mainly studied in the CNS and evidence has been presented that they play important roles in the pathogenesis of CNS injury, edema and multiple diseases such as multiple sclerosis, neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, glioblastoma multiforme, Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease.
ICOSL knockout (ICOSL-KO) mice and wild-type C57BL/6J mice were used as experimental Schistosomiasis model infected with Schistosoma japonicum.
The ICOS-ICOSL signaling has a regulatory effect on CD154-CD40 signaling pathway, and may play an important role in the hepatic egg granuloma formation of Schistosomiasis.
Using models of schistosomiasis in ICOSL KO and the C57BL/6 WT mice, we studied the role of the ICOSL/ICOS interaction in the mediation of the Th17 response in host granulomatous inflammation, particularly in liver fibrosis during S. japonicum infection, and investigated the immune responses and pathology of ICOSL KO mice in these models.
Importantly, there was a clearly positive correlation between the presence of IL-17-producing cells and ICOS expression in ICOSL KO mice, and additional results indicated that Th17 was involved in the pathological tissue remodeling in liver fibrosis induced by schistosomiasis.
LncRNA ZEB1 Antisense 1 (ZEB1-AS1) has been suggested to be an oncogenic role in human hepatocellular carcinoma, osteosarcoma, glioma and esophageal carcinoma progression.
ZEB1-AS1 acts as an oncogene in hepatocellular carcinoma, accelerating tumor growth and promoting metastasis.
LncRNA ZEB1-AS1 has been identified as a tumor oncogene in hepatocellular carcinoma.
We analyzed the outcome of allo-SCT in a population of FLT3-positive AML patients according to molecular MRD at the pretransplantation workup, assessed by the quantitative expression evaluation of the panleukemic marker Wilms' tumor (WT1) gene.
To determine the chemokine receptor expression profile in gastric mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphoma, we performed an expression analysis of 19 chemokine receptors at mRNA levels by using real-time RT-PCR, as well as of five chemokine receptors--CCR8, CCR9, CXCR4, CXCR6 and CXCR7--by immunohistochemistry on human tissue samples of Helicobacter pylori-associated gastritis, gastric MALT lymphoma and gastric extranodal diffuse large B-cell lymphoma originating from MALT lymphoma (transformed MALT lymphoma).
The transformation of gastric MALT lymphomas to gastric extranodal diffuse large B-cell lymphoma was accompanied by upregulation of CCR1, CCR5, CCR7, CCR8, CCR9, CXCR3, CXCR6, CXCR7 and XCR1.
Feline leukemia virus (FeLV) p27 or gp70 antigen was detected in 21 lymphomas (54%).
Vaccines to large B cell lymphoma were made by the covalent attachment of an epitope from the gp70 glycoprotein (SSWDFITV) to the N-termini of the conformationally biased, response-selective C5a agonists EP54 (YSFKPMPLaR) and EP67 (YSFKDMP(MeL)aR).
Syngeneic Balb/c mice were immunized with these EP54/EP67-containing vaccines and challenged with a lethal dose of the highly liver metastatic and gp70-expressing lymphoma cell line RAW117-H10 to evaluate the ability of these vaccines to induce protective immune outcomes.
CD8(+) T lymphocytes activated in response to Vaccines 2 and 3 express cytotoxic specificity for gp70-expressing RAW117-H10 lymphoma cells, but not antigen-irrelevant MDA-MB231A human breast cancer cells.
Our strategy relies on the fact that feline leukemia virus subgroup B (FeLV-B) and amphotropic murine leukemia virus (A-MLV) have closely related gp70 surface envelope glycoproteins and use related Na(+)-dependent phosphate symporters, Pit1 and Pit2, respectively, as their receptors.
Numerous studies have investigated the utility of serum intestinal fatty-acid binding protein (I-FABP) in differentiating acute intestinal ischemia from acute abdomen.
The aim of this meta-analysis is to determine the overall accuracy of serum I-FABP in the diagnosis of acute intestinal ischemia.
The meta-analysis carried out in this report suggests that the I-FABP may be a useful diagnostic tool to confirm acute intestinal ischemia in acute abdomen, but better-designed trials are still required to confirm our findings.
The aim of the present study was to evaluate whether I-FABP can predict active disease or remission in Crohn's disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC) in a real-life IBD cohort.
In our study, we found the expression of EWSAT1 was upregulated in ovarian cancer cell lines and samples.
Ecoptic expression of EWSAT1 suppressed miR-330-5p expression in ovarian cancer cell.
Moreover, the expression of miR-330-5p was negatively related with the expression of EWSAT1 in ovarian cancer samples.
Ecoptic expression of miR-330-5p suppressed Pdia3 expression and overexpression of EWSAT1 promoted Pdia3 expression in ovarian cancer cell.
Overexpression of EWSAT1 increased ovarian cancer cell proliferation, colony formation and invasion through targeting miR-330-5p.
These data suggested that EWSAT1 might act as an oncogene in the development of ovarian cancer partly through inhibiting miR-330-5p expression.
Recently, lncRNA Ewing sarcoma-associated transcript 1 (EWSAT1) was functionally identified in Ewing sarcoma, a highly aggressive primary pediatric bone tumor.
Long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) Ewing sarcoma associated transcript 1 (EWSAT1) has been identified as an oncogene, and its dysregulation is closed corrected with tumor progression in Ewing sarcoma.
Recently, high-through put analysis reveals that EWSAT1 is also highly expressed in human nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC).
We determined that long noncoding RNA-277 (Ewing sarcoma-associated transcript 1 [EWSAT1]) is upregulated by EWS-FLI1 in pMPCs.
Inhibition of EWSAT1 expression diminished the ability of Ewing sarcoma cell lines to proliferate and form colonies in soft agar, whereas EWSAT1 inhibition had no effect on other cell types tested.
Analysis of RNAseq data from primary human Ewing sarcoma further supported a role for EWSAT1 in mediating gene repression.
Together, our data reveal that EWSAT1 is a downstream target of EWS-FLI1 that facilitates the development of Ewing sarcoma via the repression of target genes.
Results: The data show that the expression of MZF-1/Elk-1 is correlated with that of PKCAlfa in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), but not in bladder and lung cancers.
Here, using PEI-Mn0.5Zn0.5Fe2O4 nanoparticles (PEI-MZF-NPs) as magnetic media for MFH (magnetic fluid hyperthermia) and gene transfer vector for gene-therapy, a combined therapy, pHRE-Egr1-HSV-TK/(131)I-antiAFPMcAb-GCV/MFH, for hepatoma is developed.
To explore a new combination of thermal treatment and gene therapy for hepatoma, a heat-inducible herpes simplex virus thymidine kinase/ganciclovir (HSV-TK/GCV) gene therapy system was developed in which thermal energy generated by Mn0.5Zn0.5Fe2O4 nanoparticles (MZF-NPs) under an alternating magnetic field was used to activate gene expression.
Magnet-induced heating was then applied to cells to assess the antihepatoma effects of the polyethylenimine (PEI)-MZF-NPs/pHsp 70-HSV-TK/GCV complex, in vitro and in vivo.
In this study, the molecular mechanism of protein kinase C alpha (PKCAlfa) gene regulation in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) involving Ets-like protein-1 (Elk-1) and myeloid zinc finger-1 (MZF-1) was investigated.
Besides, PEI-MZF-NPs were used as magnetic media for thermotherapy to treat hepatoma by magnet-induced heating, combined with radiation-gene therapy.
In a recent study on hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), we have shown that the transcription factors Myeloid Zinc Finger-1 (MZF-1) and Ets-like-protein 1 (Elk-1) are significantly related to protein kinase C alpha (PKCAlfa) expression.
Recently, our research into hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has shown that the transcription factors Myeloid Zinc Finger-1 (MZF-1) and Ets-like-protein 1 are related to protein kinase C alpha (PKCAlfa) expression.
Using immunocytochemistry, we investigated the distribution of chromogranin A, chromogranin B, secretoneurin, and, for comparison, dynorphin in hippocampal specimens removed at routine surgery from patients with drug-resistant mesial temporal lobe epilepsy and in autopsy tissues from nonneurologically deceased subjects.
The most intriguing change seen in human temporal lobe epilepsy specimens and in the kainic acid model of the rat was the prominent staining of the inner molecular layer, indicating storage of chromogranins A and B and secretoneurin in terminals of reorganized mossy fibers, from which they may be released upon nerve stimulation.
Transition of control prediabetic ZDF rats to diabetes was associated with reduced plasma insulin levels, reduced islet insulin content and GSIS, reduced stearoyl-CoA desaturase 2 (SCD 2) expression, and increased islet TAG, diacylglyceride (DAG) and ceramides species containing saturated FA.
In this research, we have found that lycorine significantly induces the apoptotic and autophagic capacities of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells in vitro and in vivo Treatment with specific autophagy inhibitor (3-methyladenine/Bafilomycin A1) or knockdown of LC-3B/Atg5 by siRNA drastically enhances the apoptotic cell death effect by facilitating the switch from autophagy to apoptosis.
The differential expression of 10 miRNAs were validated by RT-qPCR (let-7a, let-7d, let-7f and miR-16 were downregulated while miR-29b, miR-142-3p, miR-144, miR-203, and miR-223 were upregulated in OSCC; the expression of miR-1275 was variable in tumours, with high levels associated to regional lymph node invasion; additionally, miR-223 exhibited an association with advanced tumour stage/size).
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report to show the association of miR-1275 with nodal invasion and the upregulation of miR-144 in OSCC.
In the subgroup of non-vomiting drinkers with Wernicke's encephalopathy (WE), the slope of the linear regression of AETK on ETK was 1.21, so that apoTK decreased as ETK decreased.
In pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, the CCL2-CCR2 chemokine axis is used to recruit tumour-associated macrophages for construction of an immunosuppressive tumour microenvironment.
This pathway has prognostic implications in pancreatic cancer, and blockade of CCR2 restores anti-tumour immunity in preclinical models.
To determine the role of the CCL2/CCR2 axis and inflammatory monocytes (CCR2(+)/CD14(+)) as immunotherapeutic targets in the treatment of pancreatic cancer.
A novel CCR2 inhibitor (PF-04136309) was tested in an orthotopic model of murine pancreatic cancer.
Human pancreatic cancer produces CCL2, and immunosuppressive CCR2(+) macrophages infiltrate these tumors.
Inflammatory monocyte recruitment is critical to pancreatic cancer progression, and targeting CCR2 may be an effective immunotherapeutic strategy in this disease.
Weaver syndrome (WS) is a rare congenital overgrowth disorder caused by heterozygous mutations in EZH2 (enhancer of zeste homolog 2) or EED (embryonic ectoderm development).
We evaluated the associations of six nonsynonymous SNPs in the MMP3, MMP8, and MMP9 genes with skin cancer risk in a nested case-control study of Caucasians within the Nurses' Health Study among 218 melanoma cases, 285 squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) cases, 300 basal cell carcinoma (BCC) cases, and 870 normal controls.
Ninety-four cases of squamous cell carcinoma and 108 cases of basal cell carcinoma using tissue array in order to determine correlations between the expression of Ki-67, p53, EGFR, CD44v6, MMP-1 and MMP-3, invasiveness and histologic differentiation.
A novel zinc oxide-binding peptide (ZBP), FPYPGGDA, with high affinity to ZNP (K a  = 2.26 x 106 M-1) was isolated from a random peptide library and fused with a bacterial antigen, ScaA of Orientia tsutsugamushi, the causative agent of scrub typhus.
The results show that the main latex allergen, a glycine-rich protein molecule, can cause cutaneous, inhalant and systemic hypersensitivity reactions.
One hundred and one consecutive patients of Han nationality with rheumatic heart disease undergoing valve surgery were enrolled and randomly assigned to an experimental group (n=50, based on CYP2C9 and VKORC1 genotypes, pharmacogenetic-based "predicted warfarin dose" for 3 days and then was adjusted to INR until stable warfarin maintenance dose) or a control group (n=51, 2.5mg/d for 3 days and then was adjusted to INR until stable warfarin maintenance dose).
RNF216) have recently been identified in patients suffering from Gordon Holmes syndrome (GHS), characterized by cognitive decline, dementia, and movement disorders.
Our current findings of Arc misregulation by TRIAD3A variants suggest that loss-of-function mutations in TRIAD3A may contribute to dementia observed in patients with GHS driven by dysfunctional UPS components, leading to cognitive impairments through the synaptic protein Arc.
Gordon Holmes syndrome (GHS) is a distinct phenotype of autosomal recessive cerebellar ataxia, characterized by ataxia, dementia, reproductive defects and hypogonadism; it has been recently found to be associated with RNF216 mutation.
The syndrome of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, ataxia, and dementia can be caused by inactivating mutations in RNF216 or by the combination of mutations in RNF216 and OTUD4.
to investigate the molecular mechanisms and morphological substrate of reduced uterine leiomyoma in patients receiving the selective progesterone receptor modulator (SPRM) ulipristal acetate for 3 months, by estimating the immunohistochemical expression of the markers steroid receptor coactivator 1 (SRC-1), nuclear receptor corepressor 1 (NCoR-1), ER, PgR, Ki-67, p16, TGF-Beta, and VEGF in tumor tissue.
The morphological substrate of partial leiomyoma reduction was leiomyocyte apoptosis and dystrophy, tumor stroma sclerosis and hyalinosis with diminished Ki-67 expression and elevated p16 in the smooth muscle cells, trophic nodular tissue disorders exhibited by vascular wall sclerosis and lower VEGF and TGF-Beta expression, and leiomyocyte hormonal reception dysregulation that made itself evident through the reduced expression of SRC-1 with the unchanged expression of PR and ER and the maintained level of NCoR-1.
Uenb - N3y4NTb MoneKynRpHble MexaHN3Mbl N MopoonorN4ecKNN cybcTpaT peAyKmyNN neNoMNoMbl MaTKN y namyNeHToK, nony4aBwNx ceneKTNBHblN MoAynRTop nporecTepoHoBblx pemyenTopoB ynNnpNcTana amyeTaT B Te4eHNe 3 Mec, Ha ocHoBaHNN omyeHKN NMMyHorNcToxNMN4ecKoN EKcnpeccNN SRC-1, NCoR-1, ER, PGR, Ki-67, p16, TGF-Beta, VEGF B TKaHN onyxonN.
We find that AML1-ETO and corepressor NCoR co-occupy the miR-29a/b-1 locus and downregulate its expression in leukemia cells.
Authors present the history of a patient with extra-adrenal pheochromocytoma who represents in Hungary the first genetically confirmed case of hereditary paraganglioma/pheochromocytoma syndrome due to disease-causing mutation of the SDHD gene.
While SDHD has been more frequently associated with the pathogenesis of head and neck paragangliomas, SDHB mutations were mainly associated with malignant and/or extra-adrenal pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma.
SDHB mutation carriers were more likely than SDHD mutation carriers to develop extraadrenal pheochromocytomas and malignant disease, whereas SDHD mutation carriers had a greater propensity to develop head and neck paragangliomas and multiple tumors.
In contrast, SDHD mutation carriers, in addition to head and neck paragangliomas, should be observed for multifocal tumors, infrequent malignancy, and the possibility of extraadrenal pheochromocytoma.
However, in the presence of extra-adrenal pheochromocytoma, it may be more useful to screen for VHL, SDHD and SDHB mutations.
Here we show, using two different techniques, FISH and quantitative PCR that SHFM3 is caused by a minimal 325 kb duplication containing only two genes (BTRC and POLL).
The smaller duplication in the second patient contained the LBX1, BTRC, POLL, and DPCD genes and a disrupted extra copy of the dactylin gene, and was nearly identical to the smallest known duplicated region of SHFM3.
In the diagnostic work-up of alcoholic cardiomyopathy, the confirmation of alcohol abuse by carbohydrate deficient transferrin (CDT) and increased liver enzymes, and the involvement of the heart by markers of heart failure (e.g., NT-proBNP) and of necrosis (e.g., troponins or CKMb) is mandatory.
Each 10 myg/m(3) increment in daily mean concentration at lag 2 day was associated with a 0.61% (95% CI: 0.19%, 1.03%) increase in overall respiratory mortality and a 0.67% (95% CI: 0.14%, 1.21%) increase in pneumonia mortality.
The values of the relative risks for hospitalization for pneumonia and asthma were significant for lag 0 (RR=1.051, 95%CI; 1.016 to 1.088); lag 2 (RR=1.066, 95%CI: 1.023 to 1.113); lag 3 (RR=1.053, 95%CI: 1.015 to 1.092); lag 4 (RR=1.043, 95%CI: 1.004 to 1.088) and lag 5 (RR=1.061, 95%CI: 1.018 to 1.106).
A 10 microg/m increase in bushfire PM10 was associated with a 1.24% (95% confidence interval = 0.22% to 2.27%) increase in all respiratory disease admissions (at lag 0), a 3.80% (1.40% to 6.26%) increase in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease admissions (at lag 2), and a 5.02% (1.77% to 8.37%) increase in adult asthma admissions (at lag 0).
We confirmed that inhibition of TREM-1 attenuates the severity of colitis at clinically, endoscopically and histologically levels.
Indeed, TREM-1 receptor and its signaling pathways contribute to the pathology of several non-infectious acute and chronic inflammatory diseases, including atherosclerosis, ischemia reperfusion-induced tissue injury, colitis, fibrosis and cancer.
In CD4(+) T cell- and dextran sodium sulfate-induced models of colitis, Trem1(-/-) mice displayed significantly attenuated disease that was associated with reduced inflammatory infiltrates and diminished expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines.
In vivo, the treatment with the TREM-1 antagonist LP17 or control peptide was initiated at the beginning of or after induction of experimental colitis or colitis-associated tumorigenesis.
In ulcerative colitis, sTREM-1 level was correlated more strongly with the endoscopic activity (r=0.498) than the C-reactive protein level (r=0.386) or erythrocyte sedimentation rate (r=0.272), although not superior to the partial Mayo score (r=0.611).
In ulcerative colitis, sTREM-1 level was correlated most closely with the endoscopic disease activity among serum biomarkers, but was not superior to the clinical activity index.
Our results suggest that sTREM-1 level may represent a complementary marker for the assessment of endoscopic activity in ulcerative colitis, but not in Crohn's disease.
Intestinal biopsies and concurrently collected sera from patients with Crohn's disease (CD) and Ulcerative colitis (UC) enrolled in the Swiss IBD cohort study were analyzed for intestinal TREM-1 mRNA and serum sTREM-1 expression.
Serum sTREM-1 and TREM-1 mRNA expression levels were further determined in sera and colonic tissues collected at various time-points post disease induction in an experimental mouse model of colitis and correlated with disease activity.
Three TREM-1 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs, rs2234237, rs3789205, and rs9471535) were genotyped by Taqman technology on 202 Crohn's disease (CD), 265 ulcerative colitis (UC), 138 with intestinal Behcet's disease (BD), and 234 healthy controls and the relationships between these SNPs and IBD development and phenotypes were evaluated.
However, TREM-1 SNPs were not significantly associated with the development of Crohn's disease or ulcerative colitis.
Stable expression of miR-124 in diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL) cell lines diminished PDE4B expression.
Starting from the GSEA, we found that overexpression of the PDE4B in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) impinge on the same genes/pathways that are abnormally active in GC-resistant tumors.
On the basis of biopsies of the masses in the pharynx and finger, he was diagnosed with extramedullary plasmablastic plasmacytoma, with somewhat immature CD45(+), MPC-1(-), and CD49e(-).
Changes to CD45 negativity and MPC-1 partial positivity were seen, while CD49e negativity persisted, suggesting that the plasmablastic plasmacytoma had reverted to a more immature state.
He had the following poor prognostic factors: 1) multiple extramedullary plasmacytomas, 2) massive myelomatous effusion, 3) increasing immature myeloma cells with plasmablastic morphology, and 4) predominance of MPC1-CD49e-CD45+ phenotype immature myeloma cells.
Interestingly, the proportions of MPC-1(-) and MPC-1(-)CD45(+) immature monoclonal plasma cells also increased in the 7 progressive cases of MGUS.
The main hereditary LMNSs in adulthood are Kennedy's disease, late-onset spinal muscular atrophy and distal hereditary motor neuropathies.
In contrast, spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) involves the specific degeneration of LMNs, with symmetrical muscle weakness and atrophy.
Targeting lower motor neurons (LMNs) for gene delivery could be useful for disorders such as spinal muscular atrophy and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Our previous study showed that reduction of KCa3.1 channel expression by lyso-globotriaosylceramide (lyso-Gb3) inhibits differentiation into myofibroblasts and collagen synthesis, which might lead to development of ascending thoracic aortic aneurysm secondary to Fabry disease.
Moreover, lyso-Gb3 suppressed expression of class II phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase C2Beta (PI3KC2Beta) by PKA activation, which reduces the production of phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate [PI(3)P], and the reduced membrane surface expression of KCa3.1 channel was recovered by increasing the intracellular levels of PI(3)P. Consequently, our findings that lyso-Gb3 inhibited both KCa3.1 channel synthesis and surface expression by increasing intracellular cAMP, and controlled surface expression through changes in PI3KC2Beta-mediated PI(3)P production, suggest that modulation of PKA and PI3KC2Beta activity to control of KCa3.1 channel expression can be an alternative important target to attenuate ascending thoracic aortic aneurysms in Fabry disease.
These findings suggest that the KCa3.1 channel can serve as a new target to attenuate and prevent development of ascending thoracic aortic aneurysm in Fabry disease.
We sequenced BCAs in patients with autism or related NDDs, revealing disruption of 33 loci in four general categories: (1) genes previously associated with abnormal neurodevelopment (e.g., AUTS2, FOXP1, and CDKL5), (2) single-gene contributors to microdeletion syndromes (MBD5, SATB2, EHMT1, and SNURF-SNRPN), (3) novel risk loci (e.g., CHD8, KIRREL3, and ZNF507), and (4) genes associated with later-onset psychiatric disorders (e.g., TCF4, ZNF804A, PDE10A, GRIN2B, and ANK3).
Their protein products listed below immediately suggest cell signalling pathways/processes worthy of further investigation in elucidating the mechanism of CpG 5mer activity: caspase 2, the transcription factors Atf4, Hic, HoxB3 and Rqcd1, the splicing factors Rbmx, Sfrs5 and Sfrs7, the DNA replication factors Mcm5 and Brd4, phosphoinositide-3-kinase, annexin A1, mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma translocation 1 and three enzymes involved in protein ubiquitylation, Siah1, Gsa7 and Nin283.
Multiple cylindromas can have a syndromic association as seen in Brooke-Spiegler syndrome and familial cylindromatosis.
A predisposition to multiple cylindromas is seen in patients with Brooke-Spiegler syndrome, who carry germline mutations in the tumour suppressor gene CYLD.
Previous studies of inherited cylindromas have highlighted the frequent presence of bi-allelic truncating CYLD mutations as a recurrent driver mutation.
Here, we investigated inherited cylindromas from several families with germline CYLD mutations for the presence of MYB activation.
Cylindroma is a rare skin tumour that is inherited in several skin-tumour syndromes caused by germline mutations in the tumour suppressor gene, CYLD.
The aims of this study were to perform a whole-exome sequencing analysis of a breast cylindroma and to investigate the role of molecular analyses in the differentiation between breast cylindroma, a benign tumour that displays MYB expression, and CYLD gene mutations, and its main differential diagnosis, the breast solid-basaloid adenoid cystic carcinoma, a malignant tumour that is characterized by the presence of the MYB-NFIB fusion gene and MYB overexpression.
The clinical presentation of multiple, rare, skin appendage tumours called cylindromas has been attributed to germline mutations in the tumour suppressor gene CYLD (OMIM 605018).
Brooke-Spiegler Syndrome (BSS), familial cylindromatosis (FC) and multiple familial trichoepitheliomas (MFT) (OMIM #605041, #132700, #601606 respectively) differ due to the types of other skin appendage tumour seen together with cylindroma, such as spiradenoma and trichoepithelioma.
Unique tumors included a cutaneous cylindroma invasive of skull convexity occurring in familial cylindromatosis and a ganglioneuroma of the middle ear with massive bilateral skull base extension.
This review will examine and extrapolate from the recent literature to build support for the use of AXT in mitigating neuropathy in normal aging and neurodegenerative disease.
We investigated frequencies of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the candidate genes protein tyrosine phosphatase, non-receptor type 22 (PTPN22), B-cell scaffold protein with ankyrin repeats (BANK1), B lymphocyte kinase (Blk), and Fc gamma receptor class IIB (FCGR2B), which have been found to be associated with other autoimmune diseases, CD1A and CD1E, important for antigen presentation of glycolipids, and transient axonal glycoprotein 1 (TAG-1), which is associated with responsiveness to intravenous immunoglobulin in patients with chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy.
To investigate the clinical features of A-pattern exotropia and to evaluate the efficacy of surgical treatment for the correction of A-pattern exotropia (A-XT).
We identified 10 patients from three CA and from two GMS families with WDR73 mutations including the original family described with CA, mental retardation, optic atrophy, and skin abnormalities (CAMOS).
CAMOS (Cerebellar Ataxia with Mental retardation, Optic atrophy and Skin abnormalities) is a rare autosomal recessive syndrome characterized by a nonprogressive congenital cerebellar ataxia associated with mental retardation, optic atrophy, and skin abnormalities.
Eyes with laser-treated threshold ROP had significant myopia at both ages (mean spherical equivalent [MSE] in right eye at both refractions -0.72, -1.21 diopters [D]), astigmatism (MSE -1.62, -1.80 D), and anisometropia (MSE 0.82, 1.02 D; ANOVA p &lt; 0.05), and increased refractive errors across ages (paired t test p &lt; 0.05).
Monocular deprivation does affect the binding parameters (KD and Bmax) of GluRs, which may be a molecular mechanism of the development of amblyopia.
Expressions of GluRs and CaBPs (i.e., parvalbumin and calbindin D-28k) were observed to be increased in the retinal ganglion cell layer (GCL) and inner nuclear layer (INL) at 3 days and 1 week after the onset of glaucoma.
The finding that both NMDA and non-NMDA GluRs were involved in glutamate-induced excitotoxicity suggests that isolated pig RGCs provide a good model for glaucoma.
USP45 associates with ERCC1, a subunit of the DNA repair endonuclease XPF-ERCC1, via a short acidic motif outside of the USP45 catalytic domain.
Finally, USP45 localises to sites of DNA damage in a manner dependent on its deubiquitylase activity, but independent of its ability to bind ERCC1-XPF.
Together, these results establish USP45 as a new regulator of XPF-ERCC1 crucial for efficient DNA repair.
We used a polycistronic lentiviral vector (hSTEMCCA-loxP) encoding OCT4, SOX2, KLF4, and cMYC genes and containing loxP sites, excisible by Cre recombinase, to reprogram patient-specific fetal cells derived from prenatal diagnosis for several genetic disorders, such as myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1), Beta-thalassemia (Beta-Thal), lymphedema-distichiasis syndrome (LDS), spinal muscular atrophy (SMA), cystic fibrosis (CF), as well as from wild-type (WT) fetal cells.
Twelve CpG loci (11 genes) showed greater than 10% comparative difference in DNA methylation, including hyper-methylated loci of FAM181A, MRI1, PIWIL1, CHFR, DEFA1, MRPL28, AURKA, and hypo-methylated loci of NALP1L5, MAP8KIP3, ACAT2, and PM20D1 in maternal asthma.
Systemic expression of DEFA1,1B,3,4,CTSG and ELA2 was significantly higher in the neutrophilic asthma (NA) phenotype.
The objective of this study was to determine the combined influence of alpha thalassemia, fetal hemoglobin, and the UGT1A1 polymorphism on serum bilirubin levels and cholelithiasis in patients with sickle cell disease.
The present study investigated the role of several genetic factors (UGT1A1 promoter (TA)n repeat polymorphism, alpha-globin status), hematological parameters, clinical severity, and hydroxyurea (HU) therapy on the occurrence of cholelithiasis in SCD.
We confirmed that alpha-thalassemia and low basal reticulocyte (RET) count were independent protective factors for cholelithiasis while 7/7, 8/8 and 7/8 UGT1A1 (TA)n genotypes were independent predisposing factors for this complication.
We explored the potential relationship between steady state serum bilirubin levels and the incidence of cholelithiasis in the context of UGT1A1 gene A(TA)nTAA promoter polymorphism in Omani sickle cell anemia (SCA) patients, homozygotes for African (Benin and Bantu) and Arab-Indian Beta(S) haplotypes, but sharing the same microgeographical environment and comparable life style factors.
Thus, not cholelithiasis but total serum bilirubin was influenced by UGT1A1 polymorphism in this SCA cohort.
Altogether our data provide the implication of UGT1A1 and SLCO1A2 in sickle cell anemia-related cholelithiasis.
Present study was aimed to explore the effect of (TA)n UGT1A1 gene promoter polymorphism on bilirubin metabolism, bilirubinaemia, predisposition to cholelithiasis and subsequent cholecystectomy, in Sickle-Cell Anemia (SCA) and beta-Thalasemia major (bTH) in Kuwaiti subjects compared to other population.
Our results confirm UGT1A1 (TA)7 allele as one of the factors accounting for the hyperbilirubinemia and cholelithiasis observed in SCA and bTH.
We analyzed the polymorphism A(TA)nTAA at the UGT1A1 promoter and the relationships between the various A(TA)nTAA genotypes and alleles and bilirubin levels and occurrence of cholelithiasis.
We analyzed the polymorphism A(TA)&lt;formula&gt;_{n}&lt;/formula&gt; TAA at the UGT1A1 promoter and the relationships between the various A(TA)&lt;formula&gt;_{n}&lt;/formula&gt; TAA genotypes and alleles and bilirubin levels and occurrence of cholelithiasis.
The ADP-ribosyltransferase 3 gene (ART3) has been reported to be associated with non-obstructive azoospermia (NOA) in the Japanese population.
A recent Japanese study provided evidence that the rs6836703: G&gt;A single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) from the ADP-ribosyltransferase 3 (ART3) gene is significantly associated with non-obstructive azoospermia.
The analysis of genes involved in hereditary spherocytosis, by next-generation sequencing in two patients with clinical diagnosis of the disease, showed the presence of the c.1795+1G&gt;A mutation in the SPTB gene.
Hereditary spherocytosis stems from mutations in one of the genes encoding ankyrin-1 (ANKI), alpha spectrin (SPTA1) and beta spectrin (SPTB), the anion exchanger 1 (SLC4A 1), and protein 4.2 (EPB42).
We also investigated methylation profiles in peripheral blood mononuclear cells from patients with red cell membrane diseases, such as complete protein 4.2 deficiency due to ELB42 mutations, hereditary spherocytosis with EPB3 mutations, and hereditary elliptocytosis with SPTB mutations.
The mutations of most cases of hereditary spherocytosis (HS) are located in the following genes: ANK1, SPTB, SLC4A1, EPB42 and SPTA1, which encode ankyrin, spectrin beta-chain, the anion exchanger 1 (band 3), protein 4.2 and spectrin alpha-chain, respectively.
Mutations in bone morphogenetic protein 1 (BMP1) in humans or deletion of BMP1 and related protease tolloid like 1 (TLL1) in mice lead to osteogenesis imperfecta (OI).
Mutations in the proteinase bone morphogenetic protein-1 (BMP1) were recently identified in patients with osteogenesis imperfecta, which can be associated with type 1 dentinogenesis imperfecta.
We previously showed these mice to have a skeletal phenotype that includes elements of osteogenesis imperfecta (OI), osteomalacia, and deficient osteocyte maturation, observations validated by the finding of BMP1 mutations in a subset of human patients with OI-like phenotypes.
Autosomal recessive osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) accounts for 10% of all OI cases, and, currently, mutations in 10 genes (CRTAP, LEPRE1, PPIB, SERPINH1, FKBP10, SERPINF1, SP7, BMP1, TMEM38B, and WNT1) are known to be responsible for this form of the disease.
Isolated 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase deficiency (3MCCD) is an autosomal recessive disorder of leucine metabolism biochemically characterized by accumulation of 3-methylcrotonylglycine (3MCG), 3-methylcrotonic acid (3MCA) and 3-hydroxyisovaleric acid.
Isolated 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase (MCC) deficiency is an autosomal recessive disorder of leucine metabolism caused by mutations in MCCC1 or MCCC2 encoding the Alfa and Beta subunit of MCC, respectively.
We performed mutational analysis in the four main HPE causing genes (SHH, SIX3, TGIF, and ZIC2) and GLI3, a gene associated with polydactyly as well as fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) to search for microdeletions in these genes and two candidate HPE genes (DISP1 and FOXA2).
Although the CCK-1 receptor has been shown to be highly expressed in resected human pancreatic cancer samples, its role is less clear.
The aim of this in vitro study was to investigate the CCK-1 receptor expression and the function of the CCK-CCK-1 receptor pathway in the human pancreatic adenocarcinoma cell line, Mia PaCa-2.
However, the main source of CCK receptors in the pancreatic tumor samples consisted of CCK2-expressing islets and/or CCK1-expressing nerves rather than neoplastic tissue.
These data indicate that the presence of CCK receptors in human ductal pancreatic tumor samples is mainly due to CCK2 expression in residual pancreatic islets and CCK1 in pancreatic nerves.
The aim of this study was to evaluate the association of the polymorphisms in TCN2 (rs1801198) gene and in MTRR (rs1801394) gene with nonsyndromic cleft lip and/or palate (NSCL/P) in a Brazilian population.
While the roles of the GluN2A and GluN2B subunit in ischemic stroke have been well developed, the role of the GluN2C subunit in ischemia is not well understood.
In the Western blotting assay, clonidine treatment led to significant up-regulation of the expression level of NR2B and Phospho-NR2B in the hippocampus of the rats when compared with the cerebral ischemia group.
In conclusion, clonidine could improve the learning and memory ability of rats with cerebral ischemia, and NR2B, ERK1/2, CREB, NF-KB were involved in this effect.
DWEYS-IgG cross-reactive with DNA and the N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor subunits GluN2A/GluN2B has been associated with neuropsychiatric systemic lupus erythematosus (NPSLE).
Therefore, NMDAR antagonists, especially NR2B-selective ones, combined with IGF-1 may serve as an alternative therapeutic agent for oxidative stress related neurodegenerative disease.
Taken together, our results demonstrated that LBP is neuroprotective against ischemic injury by its dual roles in activation of NR2A and inhibition of NR2B signaling pathways, which suggests that LBP may be a superior therapeutic candidate for targeting glutamate excitotoxicity for the treatment of ischemic stroke.
The obesity-induced changes in adipose tissue macrophage numbers are mainly due to increases in the triple-positive CD11b+ F4/80+ CD11c+ adipose tissue macrophage subpopulation.
Contrary to our hypothesis that obesity-mediated white AT inflammation is Nlrp3-dependent, we found that Western diet-induced expression of AT inflammatory markers (i.e., Cd68, Cd11c, Emr1, Itgam, Lgals, Il18, Mcp1, Tnf, Ccr2, Ccl5 mRNAs, and Mac-2 protein) were not accompanied by increased caspase-1 cleavage, a hallmark feature of NLRP3 inflammasome activation.
In current practice, an antibody cocktail comprising p63, CK903, and AMACR (PIN-4 cocktail) is frequently utilized to evaluate foci suspicious for prostatic adenocarcinoma.
Only 2 NA cases displayed an overall PIN-4 staining pattern compatible with prostate cancer.
Although heterogenous staining patterns were seen within individual cases, use of the PIN-4 cocktail effectively discriminates NA from prostate cancer because of the high frequency of coexpression of AMACR and CK903 within NA.
Kidney and prostate cancer tumor and benign biopsies were stained with hemotoxylin and eosin and prostate biopsies were subjected to PIN-4 immunohistochemistry.
A subset of biopsy sections was analyzed by IHC, and cancerous and non-cancerous regions could be readily visualized by PIN4 staining.
Elevated serum levels of Ang-2 and high values for the Ang-2/Ang-1 ratio may potentially be used as predictors of worst-case prognoses for P. vivax malaria, especially in patients with thrombocytopenia.
Dengue-associated thrombocytopenia and endothelial activation are associated with an imbalance in angiopoietin-2: angiopoietin-1 plasma levels.
It has been previously reported that mutations in retinal G protein coupled receptor (RGR) are associated with retinitis pigmentosa.
The present study aims to systemically analyze the potential role of variants of RGR in retinal diseases.
These data suggest that the recessive retinal disorder previously reported to be due to homozygous mutation in RGR is, at least in part, due to variants in CDHR1 and that the true consequences of RGR knock-out on human retinal structure and function are yet to be determined.
Rare mutations in the human RGR gene lead to autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa or dominantly inherited peripapillary choroidal atrophy.
In Western blot assays, the RGR-d protein was detected in retinas of a large proportion ( approximately 53%) of individual donors, including patients with age-related macular degeneration (AMD).
Mutations in the human gene encoding RGR are associated with retinitis pigmentosa.
The induction of ectopic lymph node structures (ELNs) holds great promise to augment immunotherapy against multiple cancers including metastatic melanoma, in which ELN formation has been associated with a unique immune-related gene expression signature composed of distinct chemokines.
In recognition of the clinical significance of AML MRD, the European LeukemiaNet (ELN) recently recommended the establishment of CR-MRDNegative as a separate category of treatment response.
The distribution according to the European LeukemiaNet (ELN) risk categorization from 2010 was 20% favorable, 31% intermediate-1, 28% intermediate-2, and 21% adverse.
Patients were stratified using the ELN European Leukemia Net classification.
oH(E)mT-DCN treatment also attenuated the expression of major ECM components, such as collagen I/III, elastin and fibronectin and induced tumor cell apoptosis, leading to extensive viral dispersion within orthotopic pancreatic tumors and pancreatic cancer patient-derived tumor spheroids.
In this study, we firstly examined neuroprotective effects of pre- or post-treatment with 15 and 30 mg/kg ATX against ischemic damage in the gerbil hippocampal cornus ammonis 1 (CA1) region subjected to 5 min of transient cerebral ischemia using cresyl violet staining, neuronal nuclei immunohistochemistry and Fluoro-J B histofluorescence staining.
Dysregulation of cysteinyl cathepsins and their inhibitors, cystatins (stefins), were implied in progression of tumorgenesis; nevertheless, their role in sinonasal inverted papilloma (IP) is still unrecognized.
Despite fundamental limitations applying to these models, such as the distinct immune system and the different metabolism regulating liver homeostasis in rodents when compared to humans, multiple approaches, such as surgery (bile duct ligation), chemical-induced (3,5-diethoxycarbonyl-1,4-dihydrocollidine, DDC, Alfa-naphthylisothiocyanate, ANIT), viral infections (Rhesus rotavirustype A, RRV-A), and genetic manipulation (Mdr2, Cftr, Pkd1, Pkd2, Prkcsh, Sec63, Pkhd1) have been developed.
Progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis type 3 (PFIC3) is an autosomal recessive disorder of cholestasis of hepatocellular origin, typically seen in infancy or childhood caused by a defect in the ABCB4 located on chromosome 7.
For example, mutations in ABCA1 cause Tangier disease associated with defective efflux of cholesterol and phosphatidylcholine from the plasma membrane to the lipid acceptor protein apoA1 (apolipoprotein AI), mutations in ABCA3 cause neonatal surfactant deficiency associated with a loss in secretion of the lipid pulmonary surfactants from lungs of newborns, mutations in ABCA4 cause Stargardt macular degeneration, a retinal degenerative disease linked to the reduced clearance of retinoid compounds from photoreceptor cells, mutations in ABCA12 cause harlequin and lamellar ichthyosis, skin diseases associated with defective lipid trafficking in keratinocytes, and mutations in ABCB4 and ABCG5/ABCG8 are responsible for progressive intrafamilial hepatic disease and sitosterolaemia associated with defective phospholipid and sterol transport respectively.
Overexpression of the oncofetal insulin-like growth factor 2 mRNA-binding protein 2 (IMP2/IGF2BP2) has been described in different cancer types.
Furthermore, IMP2 expression in these cells correlated with the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and RAC1 expression in BTC cells, suggesting RAC1-induced ROS generation as a potential mechanism of IMP2-promoted progression of GBC.
We further analyze two independent breast cancer datasets and find that specific isoforms of IGF2BP2, NECTIN4, ITGB6, and KLHDC9 are significantly associated with AZD6244, lapatinib, erlotinib, and paclitaxel, respectively.
RT-qPCR and Spearman's correlation analysis were then performed to measure IGF2BP2 mRNA expression in clinical glioma tissues and its correlation with miR-188 expression.
Finally, the biological roles of IGF2BP2 in glioma cells were assessed.
The present study identified IGF2BP2 as a direct target of miR-188 in glioma, and IGF2BP2 under-expression served tumour-suppressive roles in glioma growth and metastasis.
Thus, miR-188 had a similar role in glioma by inhibiting the action of its downstream target, IGF2BP2.
Background: Serum autoantibodies against tumor-associated antigens (TAAs) are detectable in early-stage gastric cancer patients; however, the time point during cancerogenesis when they appear in circulation is still obscure.Methods: In this study, we developed a recombinant antigen microarray and analyzed the prevalence of autoantibodies against 102 TAAs in 829 gastric cancer patients and 929 healthy controls from Caucasian and Asian populations, as well as 100 patients with chronic atrophic gastritis and 775 individuals staged according to different grades of intestinal metaplasia.Results: Six antigens, including CTAG1B/CTAG2, DDX53, IGF2BP2, TP53, and MAGEA3, were predominantly reacting with sera from gastric cancer patients when compared with healthy controls, and the seroreactivity was associated with intestinal-type gastric cancer, but not with patients' Helicobacter pylori status, grade, age, gender, or stage of gastric cancer.
The gene encoding the Insulin-like Growth Factor 2 mRNA binding protein 2/IMP2 is amplified and overexpressed in many human cancers, accompanied by a poorer prognosis.
Herein we show in a diverse array of human cancer cells that IMP2 overexpression stimulates and IMP2 elimination diminishes proliferation by 50-80%.
IMP2 stabilization of HMGA1 mRNA plus IMP2 stimulated IGF2 production synergistically drive cancer cell proliferation and account for IMP2's tumor promoting action.
In conclusion, miR-1193 suppressed proliferation and invasion of human breast cancer cells via translational suppression of IGF2BP2.
New genes HTRP5, CAPN6, STPK, 14-3-3PKR, and CALM1 and previously known genes including BTK, DDP, GLA, PLP, COL4A5, COL4A6, PAK3, and DCX are localized; candidate loci for other disorders for which genes have not yet been identified, including DFN-2, POF, megalocornea, and syndromic and nonsyndromic mental retardation, are also mapped in the region.
To study the expression status of Ras-association domain family 7 (RASSF7) and Ras-association domain family 8 (RASSF8) in nodular thyroid goiter (NTG), medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC), and papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) and establish whether a correlation exists between the presence of RASSF7 and RASSF8 proteins and clinicopathological parameters of the disease.
Moreover, HO-1 diminished ischemia-induced expression of MyoD involved in satellite cell differentiation in HO-1 KO mice.
Coprecipitation of CD36, CD9, and alpha6beta1 was also observed on platelets from a patient with Glanzmann thrombasthenia, indicating that alphaII(b)beta3 is not required for the other proteins to associate.
To rule out a cross-reactivity of the two polyclonal antibodies with GPIIb/IIIa, we studied PECAM1 and CD9 expression on the platelets from a patient with type I Glanzmann's thrombasthenia whose platelets are devoid of GPIIb/IIIa.
In contrast to TASK-1, which was not differentially expressed in lung cancer vs. normal lung tissue, we found the Na+-coupled nutrient transporters, SLC5A3, SLC5A6, and SLC38A1, transporters for myo-inositol, biotin and glutamine, respectively, to be significantly overexpressed in lung adenocarcinomas.
qPCR analysis showed elevated expression of efflux transporters (P-glycoprotein, multidrug resistant protein 2, breast cancer resistant protein) and influx transporters (folate receptor-Alfa, cationic and neutral amino acid transporter, sodium dependent multivitamin transporter) in a time dependent manner.
Immunoblot analysis further confirmed elevated expression of breast cancer resistant protein and sodium dependent multivitamin transporter.
All these studies demonstrated for the first time the functional and molecular expression of sodium dependent multivitamin transporter (SMVT), a specific carrier-mediated system for biotin uptake, in human derived breast cancer (T47D) cells.
The overall objective of this study was to investigate the differential expression of folate receptor-alpha (FR-Alfa), sodium-dependent multivitamin transporter (SMVT), and amino acid transporter [B ((0, +))] in retinoblastoma (Y-79) and retinal pigment epithelial (ARPE-19) cells.
This work demonstrated for the first time the higher expression and affinity of FR-Alfa, SMVT, and B ((0, +)) mRNA levels in retinoblastoma (Y-79) cells compared with retinal pigment epithelial (ARPE-19) cells.
To synthesize a novel camptothecin-poly(ethylene glycol) conjugate (CPT-PEG) which includes biotin as a moiety to enhance nonspecific and/or targeted uptake via the sodium-dependent multivitamin transporter (SMVT) and to evaluate its anticancer activity and apoptosis induction.
This suggests that the targeting approach utilizing transporters such as SMVT may substantially improve the delivery of CPT and its anticancer activity by enhancing cellular permeability and possibly retention of CPT.
We have cloned the human Na+-dependent multivitamin transporter (SMVT), which transports the water-soluble vitamins pantothenate, biotin, and lipoate, from a placental choriocarcinoma cell line (JAR).
While the association between IL-16 plasma levels and tumor progression has been reported for many types of cancer, the mechanism for IL-16 involvement has been partially elucidated for three of the cancer types, cutaneous T cell lymphoma (CTCL), multiple myeloma (MM), and breast cancer.
Nuclear translocation of pro-interleukin-16 was not observed in late stages of Sezary syndrome, indicating this loss is not reversible.
We propose that it is feasible to use plasma levels of IL-16 as a potential diagnostic marker of Sezary syndrome and to use loss of intracellular IL-16 as a prognostic indicator of disease severity and stage.
By reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction, interleukin-16 mRNA was detected in 18 of 18 mycosis fungoides lesions investigated.
Given the biologic properties of interleukin-16 and the parallel activation of the interleukin-2/CD25 pathway, interleukin-16 might be involved in the recruitment and stimulation of CD4+ lymphocytes in mycosis fungoides lesions and therefore contribute to the perpetuation of the associated cutaneous inflammation.
Three additional patients with possible parathyroid adenomas at 11C-choline PET/CT were ultimately found to have thyroid lesions on the basis of tissue diagnosis; however, none of these patients had abnormal calcium or parathyroid hormone levels.
Patients with primary hyperparathyroidism generally have a single parathyroid adenoma that causes excessive excretion of parathyroid hormone.
Although double adenomas are not yet widely acknowledged, presurgical imaging and nuclear scans can help to localize multiple lesions, and intraoperative parathyroid hormone assays can confirm the diagnosis and cure.
Finally, MMGP analysis revealed a positive correlation between the transcript levels of B7-H4 and proliferation-related genes including MKI67, CCNA1, and Myc in several patients with multiple myeloma.
The purpose of this study was to evaluate the expression of cyclin A1 mRNA in patients with myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and its clinical significance.
Cyclin A1 mRNA was detectable in 11 of 11 patients with acute myeloid leukemia, three of three patients with acute biphenotypic leukemia, eight of eight patients with myelodysplastic syndrome, 59 of 69 patients with chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) at diagnosis, 13 of 15 patients with CML in blastic transformation, 10 of 18 patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia, two of nine patients with essential thrombocythemia, and only two of 10 patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) with both cyclin A1 RT-PCR positive ALL leukemias being undifferentiated relapses.
Mice with ANP showed increased apoptosis of pancreatic acinar cells, pancreatic myeloperoxidase activity, serum lactate dehydrogenase activity, amylase, tumor necrosis factor-Alfa (TNF-Alfa), interleukin-6 (IL-6) levels as well as decreased serum IL-10 level, pancreatic expression of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1), sirtuin 1 (SIRT1) and p53, but the ratio of acetylated HSF1 and p53 was markedly increased.
These data suggest that resveratrol protects against L-arginine-induced ANP, which may be related to the enhancement of SIRT1-mediated deacetylation of p53 and HSF1.
The aim of this study was to explore the role of the p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (p38MAPK)/p53 signaling pathway in injury to the intestinal mucosal barrier during severe acute pancreatitis (SAP).
Furthermore, compared with homozygous missense mutations, compound heterozygous mutations appeared to have a more severe effect on phenotype, causing more severe growth retardation in ORC4 and more frequently pulmonary emphysema in CDT1.
We recently identified an RBP HNRNPL as a novel prostate cancer dependency via regulation of RNA splicing, suggesting the potential to target RBP or RBP-RNA interaction to treat cancer.
HNRNPL directly regulates the alternative splicing of a set of RNAs, including those encoding the androgen receptor, the key lineage-specific prostate cancer oncogene.
Collectively, our data reveal HNRNPL and its RNA clients as players in prostate cancer growth and potential therapeutic targets.
Heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein L (hnRNP-L) is a promoter of various kinds of cancers, but its actions in bladder cancer (BC) are unclear.
In this study, we examined the role of HnRNP-L in prostate cancer (Pca).
These results suggest a rationale for dose reduction of doxorubicin and docetaxel in prostate cancer therapy, since the doses needed to achieve 50% cell death may be decreased by approximately 4- to 15-fold or 3- to 8-fold, respectively, after a pre-treatment with ciprofloxacin.
This study investigated the presence of CA I and II autoantibodies in patients with iron deficiency anemia (IDA).
Compared with controls, CAIII concentration was lower in iron deficiency anemia (P&lt;0.01), but higher in beta-thalassemia anemia (P&lt;0.001).
The levels of erythrocyte carbonic anhydrase isozymes (CA-B and CA-C) were determined by a quantitative immunochemical technique in order to elucidate their clinical significances in patients with iron deficiency anemia.
1 The levels of erythrocyte CA-B per gram hemoglobin, CA-B per ml erythrocyte and CA-C per gram hemoglobin all increased but CA-C per ml erythrocyte did not increased in iron deficiency anemia.
The content of CA-B synthesized in lysates was much higher than that of CA-C. 6 In iron deficiency anemia, the increase of erythrocyte CA is speculated to be compensatory mechanism, which brought about the transportation of CO2 and right shifts of O2 dissociation curve.
Inhibition of inducible T-cell kinase (ITK), a nonreceptor tyrosine kinase, may represent a novel treatment for allergic asthma.
Here we show that Itk, a mediator of T cell receptor signalling required for Th2 immune responses and the development of asthma, is a positive regulator of Th9 differentiation.
Compared to wild-type mice, ITK knockout mice are resistant to asthma and exhibit reduced lung inflammation and decreased amounts of TH2-type cytokines in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid.
Unexpectedly, inhibition of the kinase activity of ITK during or after antigen rechallenge in an ovalbumin-induced mouse model of asthma failed to reduce airway hyperresponsiveness and inflammation.
Thus, our studies predict that inhibition of the kinase activity of ITK may not be therapeutic in patients with asthma.
FeNO levels were significantly elevated in the asthma compared to the control group (26 +/- 18 versus 11 +/- 4 ppb; p &lt; 0.05), and trended higher than levels in the tetraplegia group (15 +/- 6; p = 0.08).
The medicinal chemistry community has directed considerable efforts toward the discovery of selective inhibitors of interleukin-2 inducible T-cell kinase (ITK), given its role in T-cell signaling downstream of the T-cell receptor (TCR) and the implications of this target for inflammatory disorders such as asthma.
The caspase-3 apoptotic index was a strong risk factor for subsequent gestational trophoblastic neoplasia development.
The two genes were CXCL6 (chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 6) and BBS5 (Bardet-Biedl syndrome 5).
Compared with patients with a false-positive penicillin allergy result (confirmed by negative penicillin skin testing result), patients reporting a true penicillin allergy confirmed by positive penicillin skin test results tended to be more frequently men (61.5% versus 44.5%; Delta 17.0%; 95% CI -13.5% to 42%), black (69.2% versus 44.5%; Delta 24.7%; 95% CI -6.9% to 46.8%), and have no family history of drug allergy (7.7% versus 17.5%; Delta9.8%; 95% CI -20.9% to 20.4%), but self-reported other drug allergies more frequently (61.5% versus 38.7%; Delta 22.9%; 95% CI -7.7% to 47.5%).
We identified 12 biomarkers consistently associated with either clinical groups "upstream" towards culture-positive TB on the TB disease spectrum (CD14, FCGR1A, FPR1, MMP9, RAB24, SEC14L1, and TIMP2) or "downstream" towards a decreased likelihood of TB disease (BLR1, CD3E, CD8A, IL7R, and TGFBR2), suggesting a correlation with MTB-related pathology and high relevance to a future POC test for pediatric TB.
However, aberrant expression of class III Beta-tubulin has been observed in passaged RPE cells and RPE cells with dedifferentiated morphology in pathologic epiretinal membranes from idiopathic macular pucker, proliferative vitreoretinopathy (PVR) and proliferative diabetic retinopathy (PDR).
Disorders in the ability ofleukocytes to produce IFN-alpha and IFN-gamma were detected in patients with bronchial asthma and allergic rhinitis.
Factors underlying the 'exacerbation-prone' phenotype are incompletely understood but include extrinsic factors: cigarette smoking, medication non-compliance, psychosocial factors, and co-morbidities such as gastroesophageal reflux disease, rhinosinusitis, obesity, and intolerance to non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medications; as well as intrinsic factors such as deficient epithelial cell production of the anti-viral type I interferons (IFN-alpha and IFN-beta).
These data indicate that therapeutic strategies using SAHPs targeting CD36, but not necessarily mimicking all apolipoprotein A-I functions, may be considered a possible new treatment approach for inflammation-induced ALI and pulmonary edema.
The enhanced expression of IL-17 that is observed in patients with Crohn's disease could act on intestinal fibroblasts to induce expression of transcription factor NFKBIZ and proinflammatory chemokine CXCL1.
In the majority of cases, autosomal dominant nonsyndromic hearing loss is postlingual and progressive, with the exception of hearing impairment in families in which the impairment is linked to DFNA3, DFNA8/12, and DFNA24, the novel locus described in this report.
The morphological similarity and resemblance of keratin 1, 10, and 14 profiles, and p63 and Beta-catenin expression between mixed epidermal and inner root sheath hybrid cysts and keratoacanthomas suggests that hybrid cysts progressed to keratoacanthomas, and the cells from infundibular cells to inner root sheath cells of the pilar segment seem to be the origin of rat keratoacanthomas.
UCDs include a spectrum of enzyme deficiencies, namely n-acetylglutamate synthase deficiency (NAGS), carbamoyl phosphate synthetase I deficiency (CPS1), ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency (OTC), argininosuccinate lyase deficiency (ASL), citrullinemia type I (ASS1), and argininemia (ARG).
Recovery was also associated with maternal obesity, and there was some ethnic variation - in the adjusted analysis indigenous (Orang Asal) Malaysians had lower odds of recovery.
Argininosuccinic acid lyase (ASL) deficiency, caused by mutations in the ASL gene (OMIM: 608310) is a urea cycle disorder that has pleiotropic presentations.
These include N-acetylglutamate synthase deficiency (NAGSD); Carbamyl phosphate synthetase 1 deficiency (CPS1D); Ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency (OTCD); Argininosuccinate synthetase deficiency (ASSD) (Citrullinemia); Argininosuccinate lyase deficiency (ASLD) (Argininosuccinic aciduria); Arginase deficiency (ARGD, Argininemia); Hyperornithinemia, hyperammonemia, homocitrullinuria (HHH) syndrome (or mitochondrial ornithine transporter 1 deficiency [ORNT1D]); and Citrullinemia type II (mitochondrial aspartate/glutamate carrier deficiency [CITRIN]).
Cardiomyopathy [methylmalonic (MMA) and propionic aciduria (PA)], prolonged QTc interval (PA), optic nerve atrophy [MMA, isovaleric aciduria (IVA)], pancytopenia (PA), and macrocephaly [glutaric aciduria type 1 (GA1)] were exclusively found in OAD patients, whereas hepatic involvement was more frequent in UCD patients, in particular in argininosuccinate lyase (ASL) deficiency.
Fifteen patients (8 argininosuccinate lyase deficiency, 3 argininosuccinic acid synthetase deficiency, 3 ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency, 1 arginase deficiency) ages 2 months through 5 years enrolled in and completed the study.
The 20 genes with at least a 3-fold change, annotated with known phenotypic associations in the current gene databank (phenotype association, fold change) were aspartoacylase (Canavan disease, 9.96), growth hormone receptor (Laron dwarfism, idiopathic short stature, 8.25), lipoprotein lipase (familial chylomicronemia syndrome, lipoprotein lipase deficiency, 8.00), vitamin D (1,25- dihydroxyvitamin D3) receptor (involutional osteoporosis, vitamin D resistant rickets, 7.94), intercellular adhesion molecule 1 human rhinovirus receptor (cerebral malaria susceptibility, 7.16), peroxisomal membrane protein 3 35-kDa (Refsum disease, infantile form, Zellweger syndrome-3, 6.00), Bardet-Biedl syndrome 2 (Bardet-Biedl syndrome, 5.87), ribosomal protein S19 (Diamond Blackfan anemia, 5.85), apolipoprotein C-III (hypertriglyceridemia, 5.44), argininosuccinate lyase (argininosuccinicaciduria, 5.22), myosin VA (Griscelli syndrome-type pigmentary dilution with mental retardation, 4.92), lysozyme (renal amyloidosis, 4.17), SAM domain, SH3 domain and nuclear localisation signals 1 (Cherubism, 4.12 ), von Hippel-Lindau syndrome (hemangioblastoma, cerebellar, somatic, von Hippel-Lindau syndrome, 3.94), early-onset breast cancer 1 (BRCA1, papillary serous carcinoma of the peritoneum, 3.73), UDP-N-acetylglucosamine-2-epimerase/N-acetylmannosamine kinase (inclusion body myopathy, autosomal recessive, sialuria, 3.53), apolipoprotein A-I (amyloidosis, 3 or more types, hypoalphalipoproteinemia, 3.29), midline 1 Opitz/BBB syndrome (Opitz G syndrome, type I, 3.28), ATPase, Na+/K+ transporting, alpha 2 (+) polypeptide (familial hemiplegic migraine, 3.05).
Thirteen families were investigated, of which two were affected by N-acetylglutamate synthase deficiency, four by carbamoylphosphate synthetase 1 deficiency, one by ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency, three by argininosuccinate synthetase deficiency, two by argininosuccinate lyase deficiency, and one by arginase deficiency.
In this study, we examined the relationship between the lactic acid concentration and expression of LDHA and GLUT1, which are related to the Warburg effect, in human head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC).
We found that cetuximab downregulated lactate dehydrogenase A (LDH-A) and inhibited glycolysis in cetuximab-sensitive head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) cells in an HIF-1Alfa downregulation-dependent manner.
An Australian cohort of 252 unrelated familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy patients were screened for mutations in the Ca(2+) regulatory genes, sorcin (SRI), calstabin (FKBP1B), calsequestrin (CASQ2), phospholamban (PLN), sarcolipin (SLN), calreticulin (CALR3) and calmodulin (CALM).
The validated proteins contain the clinically used hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) biomarker alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) and the reported biomarker candidates Heat shock protein HSP 90-beta (HSP90), fatty acid-binding protein, epidermal (FABP5) and alcohol dehydrogenase 4 (ADH4), which demonstrated the robustness of the strategy.
In vivo, Hsp90Beta promoted VEGFRs and CD31 expression in human hepatocellular carcinoma tumor xenografts and was associated with increased tumor microvessel density.
In this study we report an apparent synergy between TGF-Beta1 and Hsp90Beta in stimulating migratory behaviour of colon cancer cells when signalling occurs via AlfavBeta6 integrin as opposed to the canonical TGF-Beta1 pathway.
Our findings indicate that the C allele of the novel colorectal cancer-associated variant rs2282151 is associated with increased expression levels of HSP90AB1, which is expressed higher in colorectal tumor tissues than in normal tissues.
Bortezomib induced internalization and degradation of c-KIT by binding c-KIT to Cbl, an E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase, and the subsequent release of Apaf-1, which was originally bound to the c-KIT-Hsp90Beta-Apaf-1 complex, induced primary apoptosis in GIST-T1 cells.
Both Annexin A1 and HSP90Beta were GlcNAcylated, and their protein expressions were elevated in colon cancer, compared to normal tissues.
Moreover, specific changes of GlcNAc abundances in Annexin A1 and HSP90Beta suggested that tumor-specific glycan patterns could serve as candidate biomarkers of colon cancer for distinguishing cancer patients from healthy individuals.
In addition, the knockdown of PEPCK, which is the rate-limiting enzyme for gluconeogenesis, led to a reduction in glucose production in rat hepatoma H4IIEC3 cells.
We recently reported expression of the chemokine receptors CXC chemokine receptor 3 (CXCR3) and CC chemokine receptor 4 (CCR4) in adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma and showed a preferential expression of CCR4 and its association with an unfavorable outcome.
We present a review of the current knowledge on cellular metabolism in non-cancerous and cancerous thyroid tissues, focusing on the monocarboxylate transporters MCT1 and MCT4, and on a transporter of the outer mitochondrial membrane TOMM20.
Papillary thyroid cancer and FA thyrocytes had high staining for TOMM20 compared to NCT and nodular goiter (NG) (P &lt; 0.01).
Staining patterns of MCT1 and TOMM20 in 35 human thyroid samples (15 ATC, 12 papillary thyroid cancer [PTC], and eight non-cancerous thyroid) and nine ATC mouse orthotopic xenografts were assessed by visual and Aperio digital scoring.
TOMM20 is also highly expressed in both ATC and PTC compared to non-cancerous thyroid tissue (P&lt;.01 for both).
High MCT1 and TOMM20 expression is also found in ATC mouse xenograft tumors compared to non-cancerous thyroid tissue (P&lt;.001).
ATC has metabolic features that distinguish it from PTC and non-cancerous thyroid tissue, including high expression of MCT1 and TOMM20.
PTC has low expression of MCT1 and non-cancerous thyroid tissue has low expression of both MCT1 and TOMM20.
AM can induce a metastatic phenotype in prostate cancer cells through its action on TRPV2 calcium channels and is also capable of influencing localised levels of RANKL in the bone to favour tumourigenesis.
To determine the profiles of soluble cytokine receptors and cytokines, including mostly their ligands, in the vitreous humor of patients with B-cell vitreoretinal lymphoma (VRL) and uveitis.
In analyses in patients with VRL, elevation of sVEGFR1 and sVEGFR2 levels was more prominent in patients with systemic metastatic retinal lymphoma (SMRL) than in those with primary VRL/primary central nervous system lymphoma (PVRL/PCNSL).
For example in prostate cancer cells, the TRPV2 activation following lysophospholipid or adrenomedullin stimulation enhances the invasiveness of cancer cells; furthermore, the increased malignancy of castration-resistant prostate cancer cells was associated with enhanced TRPV2 expression, mainly in metastatic prostate cancer cells.
In this regard, bladder cancer tumors show loss or reduction of a short TRPV2 variant during cancer progression, with increased malignancy and invasiveness.
TRPV2 and TRPM7 expression levels and TRPV2 activator-induced intracellular Ca(2+) increases were significantly higher, whereas TRPV4 expression and TRPV4 activator-induced intracellular Ca(2+) increases were significantly lower in mouse bladder cancer (MBT-2) cells compared to normal mouse urothelial cells.
Increases in the expression of TRPV2 mRNA, immunoreactivity, and TRPV2 activator-induced intracellular Ca(2+) were also observed in T24 human bladder cancer cells.
These results suggested that TRPV2 and TRPM7 were functionally expressed in bladder cancer cells and served as negative regulators of bladder cancer cell proliferation, most likely to prevent excess mechanical stresses.
On the other hand, in prostate cancer cells, Ca2+-dependent activation of TRPV2 induced by lysophospholipids increases the invasion of tumor cells.
In addition, the progression of prostate cancer to the castration-resistant phenotype is characterized by de novo TRPV2 expression, with higher TRPV2 transcript levels in patients with metastatic cancer.
The aim of the present study was to investigate the effects of TRPV2 on the proliferation, migration and invasion of 5637 bladder cancer cells in vitro.
Rat TRPV2 cDNA was transfected into 5637 bladder cancer cells and changes in the behavior of the cells were detected.
It was observed that TRPV2 enhanced bladder cancer cell migration and invasion; however, it did not affect cell proliferation in vitro.
The results of this study suggest that TRPV2 channels are a potential therapeutic target for bladder carcinoma.
The Transient Receptor Potential channel TRPV2 is known to promote in prostate cancer cell migration and invasive phenotype and is correlated with the stage and grade of bladder cancer.
Initial studies showed that expression profile of some TRP channels, notably TRP melastatin 8 (TRPM8), TRP vanilloid 6 (TRPV6),TRP canonical (TRPC6) and TRPV2, is changing during the development and the progression of prostate cancer towards the hormone-refractory stages.
The expression of TRPV2 mRNA in bladder cancer cell lines (T24, a poorly differentiated UC cell line and RT4, a well-differentiated UC cell line) was analyzed using reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction.
Furthermore, the effects of resveratrol and Shh on human colorectal cancer HCT116 cells were in a dose- and time-dependent manner.
Furthermore, knockdown of PFTK1 suppressed the expression of Shh as well as Smo, Ptc, and Gli-1 in colon cancer cells.
Taken together, these results suggest that knockdown of PFTK1 inhibited the proliferation and invasion of colon cancer cells as well as the EMT progress by suppressing the Sonic hedgehog signaling pathway.
This case illustrates the potential severity of the renal anomalies in the BOR syndrome and the inadequacy of oligohydramnios and maternal serum alpha-fetoprotein as screening methods for renal agenesis.
Severe sepsis and antibiotic use were both associated with moderate thrombocytopenia, and proton pump inhibitor use was statistically significant in both univariate and multivariate analysis.
Thrombocytopenia is associated with poor prognosis, and the association between moderate thrombocytopenia and proton pump inhibitor use is relatively novel and should be validated in prospective studies.
We identified 12 biomarkers consistently associated with either clinical groups "upstream" towards culture-positive TB on the TB disease spectrum (CD14, FCGR1A, FPR1, MMP9, RAB24, SEC14L1, and TIMP2) or "downstream" towards a decreased likelihood of TB disease (BLR1, CD3E, CD8A, IL7R, and TGFBR2), suggesting a correlation with MTB-related pathology and high relevance to a future POC test for pediatric TB.
Western blot assay further confirmed that anti-ICAM-T0901317 liposomes inhibited retinoblastoma (Rb) phosphorylation and MCM6 expression.
Inhibition of MCM6 and MCM7 expression by nTZDpa and rosiglitazone paralleled their effect to inhibit phosphorylation of the retinoblastoma protein and cell proliferation.
Snord3A expression was also elevated in scrapie infected mice, but not in PrP(0/0) mice, indicating that while the expression levels of this transcript may reflect diverse prion etiologies, they are not related to the loss of PrP(C)'s function.
We hypothesize that in addition to its function as a disease marker, Snord3A may play an important role in the mechanism of prion disease manifestation and progression.
Her son has type 1 diabetes, arthritis, reduced IgG levels and IgA deficiency, but has not inherited the TNFRSF13B/TACI mutation.
Our results support the hypothesis that increased TACI expression on NOD B cells contributes to the pathogenesis of type 1 diabetes in the NOD mouse.
A family member with a wild type TACI variant had CVID-related phenotype including IgA deficiency and type 1 diabetes.
We mapped the loci contributing to the increased proportion of TACI(high) expressing splenic B cells and found that the control of TACI expression was strongly linked to chromosome 1, in a region which includes the insulin-dependent diabetes (Idd) 5 loci.
Our findings corroborate the notion that B cell deviations contribute to type 1 diabetes development, and suggest a temporal regulation of TACI(high) expression, possibly influenced by the ongoing autoimmune process.
Octamer-binding transcription factor 4 (OCT4) was closely related to pancreatic cancer progression, but its regulation in pancreatic cancer by microRNA (miRNA) is not fully clear.
This study was designed to investigate the expression of the T-box transcription factor 4 (TBX4), a tumor biomarker that was previously identified by proteomics, in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) and evaluate its clinical utility as a potential prognostic biomarkers for PDAC.
Whereas the pathological functions of LTB4/BLT1 axis in allergy, autoimmunity and cardiovascular disorders are well established; its role in cancer is only beginning to emerge.
Bioluminescence tomography (BLT) is a powerful non-invasive molecular imaging tool for in vivo studies of glioma in mice.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study that achieved such accurate BLT morphological reconstruction of orthotopic glioma without using any segmented tumor structure from any other structural imaging modalities as the prior for reconstruction guidance.
This enabled BLT more suitable and practical for in vivo imaging of orthotopic glioma mouse models.
The major objective of this study is to address this gap in our understanding of how IDO1 expression contributes to the biology of GBM, and whether its level of expression is a determinant of GBM patient outcome.Experimental Design: Patient-resected GBM, The Cancer Genome Atlas, human T-cell:GBM cocultures, as well as nu/nu, NOD-scid, and humanized (NSG-SGM3-BLT) mice-engrafted human GBM form the basis of our investigation.Results:In situ hybridization for IDO1 revealed transcript expression throughout patient-resected GBM, whereas immunohistochemical IDO1 positivity was highly variable.
Together with CT, BLT can provide precision radiation guidance and robust tumor volume assessment in small animal cancer research.
Variation of detected bioluminescence signals emitted from molecular cancer cells was depicted on BLT images.
Multispectral BLT images elaborated on early detection of cancer cells, characteristics of tumor growth, and metastasis for more accurate determination of internal bioluminescent sources.
Registration of BLT with CT images guided molecular cancer cells on anatomical coordinates.
The BLT imaging was a useful tool to localize cancer cells and to quantify radiation response.
Application of BLT led to more accurate definition of tumor volumes including molecular probe-based microscopic cancer cells.
Thus, in this report, we not only provide a novel strategy to expand super-charged NK cells, but also demonstrate that rapid and sustained expansion of residual T cells within the purified NK cells during expansion with DCs or OCs could be a potential mechanism by which the numbers and function of NK cells decline in cancer patients and in BLT-humanized mice.
Verrucous carcinoma (VC) is a variant of well-differentiated squamous cell carcinoma and in the anal region is regarded as synonymous with giant condyloma (Buschke-Loewenstein tumour) (BLT).
To test this idea, we infected migrating neural crest cells of chicken embryos with  replication-competent avian sarcoma virus expressing either FgfR2(C278F), a receptor mutation found in Crouzon syndrome or the ligand Fgf8.
These defects are similar in presentation to several human craniofacial disorders (e.g., craniosynostosis, hemifacial microsomia), and may be related to increased levels of bone metabolism observed in ace(ti282a)/fgf8 heterozygotes.
Since FGF8 maps to the same chromosomal region as FGFR2, has indeed been shown to be a ligand for FGFR2, and has an expression pattern consistent with limb and craniofacial anomalies, we have screened two kindreds with Pfeiffer syndrome that were previously linked to markers from 10q24-25 and a large number of individuals with craniosynostosis and limb anomalies for mutations in the coding sequence of FGF8.
The results demonstrated that rhTrx-1 significantly improved neurological functions and reduced cerebral infarction and apoptotic cell death at 24h after MCAO.
Treatment with Trx1 siRNA significantly increased mortality, behavioral deficits, and cerebral infarction volume and exacerbated neuronal cell apoptotic death after MCAO injury.
The results showed that intravenously administered rhTrx-1 (10 mg/kg) significantly improved neurological functions and reduced cerebral infarction and apoptotic cell death following cerebral ischemia.
Furthermore, the suppression on ONOO- formation by either rhTrx-1 or an ONOO- scavenger uric acid reduced cerebral infarct size in mice subjected to cerebral ischemia.
Proenkephalin (pro-ENK), a stable and reliable surrogate marker for unstable enkephalins, was found to be associated with acute kidney injury and chronic renal failure in previous studies.
PENK and NGAL concentrations were measured and GFR was estimated by using the isotope dilution mass spectrometry traceable-Modification of Diet in Renal Disease (MDRD) Study and three Chronic Kidney Disease Epidemiology Collaboration (CKD-EPI) equations: CKD-EPI(Cr), CDK-EPI(CysC), and CKD-EPI(Cr-CysC).
Proenkephalin cleavage products stored within cells, which included the 5.3-kDa peptide, could be released upon stimulation of cells with BaCl2 (2-fold above basal levels), 8-bromo-cAMP or CRF (7- and 8-fold above basal levels, respectively), and a mixture of BaCl2 and 8-bromo-cAMP (20-fold above basal levels).
Part 1 focuses on anti-metabotropic glutamate receptor 1-, anti-Homer protein homolog 3-, anti-Sj/inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor- and anti-carbonic anhydrase-related protein VIII-associated autoimmune cerebellar ataxia (ACA); part 2 covers anti-protein kinase C gamma-, anti-glutamate receptor delta-2-, anti-Ca/RhoGTPase-activating protein 26- and anti-voltage-gated calcium channel-associated ACA; and part 3 reviews the current knowledge on anti-Tr/delta notch-like epidermal growth factor-related receptor-, anti-Nb/AP3B2-, anti-Yo/cerebellar degeneration-related protein 2- and Purkinje cell antibody 2-associated ACA, discusses differential diagnostic aspects and provides a summary and outlook.
Part 1 focuses on anti-metabotropic glutamate receptor 1-, anti-Homer protein homolog 3-, anti-Sj/inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor- and anti-carbonic anhydrase-related protein VIII-associated autoimmune cerebellar ataxia (ACA); part 2 covers anti-protein kinase C gamma-, anti-glutamate receptor delta-2-, anti-Ca/RhoGTPase-activating protein 26- and anti-voltage-gated calcium channel-associated ACA; and part 3 reviews the current knowledge on anti-Tr/delta notch-like epidermal growth factor-related receptor-, anti-Nb/AP3B2-, anti-Yo/cerebellar degeneration-related protein 2- and Purkinje cell antibody 2-associated ACA, discusses differential diagnostic aspects, and provides a summary and outlook.
Part 1 focuses on anti-metabotropic glutamate receptor 1-, anti-Homer protein homolog 3-, anti-Sj/inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor- and anti-carbonic anhydrase-related protein VIII-associated autoimmune cerebellar ataxia (ACA); part 2 covers anti-protein kinase C gamma-, anti-glutamate receptor delta-2-, anti-Ca/RhoGTPase-activating protein 26- and anti-voltage-gated calcium channel-associated ACA; and part 3 reviews the current knowledge on anti-Tr/delta notch-like epidermal growth factor-related receptor-, anti-Nb/AP3B2-, anti-Yo/cerebellar degeneration-related protein 2- and Purkinje cell antibody 2-associated ACA, discusses differential diagnostic aspects and provides a summary and outlook.
Lastly, a recent study identified delta/notch-like epidermal growth factor-related receptor (DNER) as the target antigen of Tr antibodies, a marker of cerebellar ataxia and Hodgkin's lymphoma.
Real-time quantitative PCR confirmed significantly increased expression of HAS2, CHSY1, and C4ST1 in the combined groups of CLE lesions (n = 8) compared to healthy controls (n = 4).
Thus, the increase in HA in CLE presumably results from upregulation of HAS2, whereas CHSY1 and C4ST1 appear to contribute to increased CS.
Through Part 4 of Maintenance of Certification for Family Physicians (MC-FP), American Board of Family Medicine (ABFM) diplomates participate in quality improvement (QI) modules for diabetes.
Family physicians participating in MC-FP implemented improvement projects and showed quality improvements in caring for patients with diabetes.
Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM) and Graves' disease (GD) are autoimmune endocrinopathies and associated with distinct HLA-DR and -DQ alleles as well as several tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha) and beta (TNF-beta) alleles.
Studies in Caucasians have suggested that the TNFB gene might be a susceptibility gene for Graves' disease.
To investigate further the role of TNFB in predisposition to Graves' disease, we determined whether the TNFB disease associations in the Chinese were similar to those in Caucasians.
We conclude that the TNFB associations with Graves' disease in the Hong Kong Chinese differ between the genders and from those described in Caucasians.
The TNFB gene is not a susceptibility gene for Graves' disease.
We show here a significant association of TNF beta polymorphisms with Graves' disease.
Although TNF beta polymorphisms are linked to A1B8DR3, these results suggest that they represent an additional susceptibility marker in Graves' disease.
Here, we summarize our findings of targeted SOX9 destruction by SCFFBW7 (Skp1/Cul1/F-box) in medulloblastoma and its potential for therapeutic intervention.
A point mutation in mouse Vps33a (Buff mouse) causes albinism and bleeding (Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome) because of abnormalities in the trafficking of melanosomes and platelets.
A mutation in the Vps33a gene causes Hermansky-Pudlak Syndrome (HPS)-like-symptoms in the buff (bf) mouse mutant.
Epicardial LGEs were identified in 10/13 and pericarditis in 6/13 RAH.
An RA relapse was observed after 7-40 days in 10/13 RAH with myopericarditis.
We found that LGI3 and its receptors, ADAM22 and ADAM23, were significantly downregulated in glioma tissues.
Analysis of expression microarray data of glioma cohorts demonstrated that low expression levels of LGI3, ADAM22 and ADAM23 were significantly associated with poor prognosis of glioma.
Rather, we observed that, in ADAM23-heterotypic environments, ADAM23-negative cells promote tumor growth and metastasis by enhancing the proliferation and invasion of adjacent A23-positive cells through the production of LGI4 (Leucine-rich Glioma Inactivated 4) and nitric oxide (NO).
The aim of the present study was to evaluate ADAM28 and Insulin Like Growth Factor Binding Protein-3 (IGFBP-3)) gene expression in colorectal carcinoma tissues with regard to the overweight or obese status of the patients using an oligonucleotide microarray technique.
The expression of cancer stem cell marker cluster of differentiation 271 (CD271) was determined in traditional two-dimensional (2D) and 3D cultures of C918 uveal melanoma cells by fluorescent immunocytochemistry.
The missense mutation (c.370G &gt; A) in the TGFBI gene and insert mutation (c.1456-1457ins GAT) in the KRT12 gene were identified in a 23-year-old male patient with concurrent KC and GCD.
This study investigated the TGFBI gene mutation types in outpatients clinically diagnosed with granular corneal dystrophy (GCD) prior to phototherapeutic keratectomy (PTK), also calculated the mutation rate of subjects with normal corneas, but positive family history.
To describe 2 unrelated families with multiple members demonstrating a less commonly recognized vortex pattern of corneal deposits confirmed to be granular corneal dystrophy type 1 (GCD1) after identification of the p.(Arg555Trp) mutation in the transforming growth factor Beta-induced gene (TGFBI).
Screening of TGFBI in both families revealed a heterozygous missense mutation [p.(Arg555Trp)] in exon 12, confirming the diagnosis of GCD1.
Although this pattern of dystrophic deposits is not recognized by clinicians as a typical phenotype of GCD1, it is consistent with the production of the majority of the TGFBI protein by the corneal epithelium.
In this study, patients with macular corneal dystrophy (MCD; n = 18), granular corneal dystrophy type 1 (GCD1; n = 12), and lattice corneal dystrophy type 1 (LCD1; n = 4), as well as 50 healthy controls, were subjected to clinical and genetic examinations.
Variations were analyzed with DNA sequencing in the coding region of CHST6 in patients with MCD and exons 4 and 12 in TGFBI in patients with LCD1 and GCD1.
The previously reported R555W mutation in TGFBI was detected in 12 patients with GCD1, and the R124C mutation in TGFBI was detected in four patients with LCD1.
We detected previously reported, well-known hot spot mutations in TGFBI in the patients with GCD1 and LCD1.
TGFBeta1-induced expression of transforming growth factor Beta-induced protein (TGFBIp) and extracellular matrix (ECM) genes plays a major role in the development of granular corneal dystrophy type 2 (GCD2: also called Avellino corneal dystrophy).
We examined the role of chromatin markers such as histone H3 lysine methylation (H3Kme) in TGFBeta1-induced TGFBIp and ECM gene expression in normal and GCD2-derived human corneal fibroblasts.
Transcription and extracellular-secretion levels of TGFBIp were high in normal cells compared with those in GCD2-derived cells and were related to H3K4me3 levels but not to DNA methylation over the TGFBI locus.
This study expands on our previous research investigating dystrophic stromal aggregates, with the aim of better elucidating the pathomechanism of two conditions arising from the most common TGFBI mutations: granular corneal dystrophy type 1 (GCD1; R555W) and lattice corneal dystrophy type 1 (LCD1; R124C).
Patient corneas with GCD1 and LCD1 were stained with hematoxylin and eosin and Congo red to visualize stromal nonamyloid and amyloid deposits, respectively.
An increase in the number of residues experiencing cleavage was observed in both GCD1 aggregates and LCD1 deposits.
The study reveals previously unknown differences between the protein composition of GCD1 and LCD1 aggregates, and confirms the presence of the HtrA1 protease in LCD1-amyloid aggregates.
GCD is a Category 1, Stromal, TGFBI-associated corneal dystrophy.
We show here that the Arg555Trp mutant of the fourth fasciclin 1 (FAS1-4) domain of the protein (TGFBIp/keratoepithelin/Betaig-h3), associated with granular corneal dystrophy type 1, is significantly less susceptible to proteolysis by thermolysin and trypsin than the WT domain.
MiR-139-5p has been reported to be overexpressed in many types of cancers, but its role in bladder cancer has not been elucidated yet.
Here, we report that miR-139-5p functions as a tumor suppressor in bladder cancer and inhibits the cancer stem cell self-renewal by targeting Bmi1 directly.
We found that miR-139-5p expression was significantly downregulated in the bladder cancer specimens compared with that in adjacent normal tissues.
In vitro, restoration of miR-139-5p expression significantly inhibited the proliferation of bladder cancer cells.
Stem cell-related proteins such as c-MYC, NANOG, OCT4, and KLF4 and signaling pathways such as Wnt signaling were suppressed by restoration of miR-139-5p in bladder cancer cells.
In addition, miR-139-5p expression also blocked self-renewal of bladder cancer stem cells by inhibiting Bmi1.
In summary, our study supports that miR-139-5p acts as a tumor suppressor in bladder cancer development and suppresses cancer stem cell property of bladder cancer.
Our study also suggests that miR-139-5p has the potential to be used as a therapeutic molecule for bladder cancer treatment.
We present a case with CblC disease and pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) as the main symptom.
CblC disease should be considered in the differential diagnosis of pulmonary hypertension.
Genetic association of rs678849 along with neuroimaging and biomarker phenotypes, parallel with the known involvements of the OPRD1 in drug abuse, provided additional support for targeting these receptors as potential therapeutic targets in both neurodegenerative diseases and neuropsychiactric disorders such as Alzheimer's disease.
Recently, a robust up-regulation of human natural killer-1 sulfotransferase (HNK-1ST) was found in several subsets of melanoma cells during RA-mediated differentiation.
Here, we show that HNK-1ST changed the glycosylation state and reduced the ligand binding activity of Alfa-dystroglycan (Alfa-DG) in RA-treated S91 melanoma cells, which contributed to an attenuation of cell migration.
Ten genes of importance for HNK-1 biosynthesis (B3GAT1, B3GAT2, and CHST10) or for the formation of perineuronal nets (TNR, BCAN, NCAN, HAPLN1, HAPLN2, HAPLN3, and HAPLN4) were investigated for potential involvement in schizophrenia (SCZ) susceptibility, by genotyping 104 tagSNPs in the Scandinavian Collaboration on Psychiatric Etiology sample (849 cases; 1602 control subjects).
We show that CHST10 is also regulated by RARgamma in a significant subset of human melanoma cells, and three-dimensional cell culture migration assays suggest that CHST10 functions as a suppressor of invasiveness, but not proliferation, in these cells.
Induction of CHST10 by RARgamma-activating retinoids may present a novel therapeutic strategy to inhibit invasiveness in a subset of melanoma patients.
No disease-associated mutations were detected in the candidate genes SEMA4C, CNGA3 or HNK1ST from within the region.
Most XLMTM patients develop severe muscle weakness leading to respiratory failure and death, typically within 2 years of age.
Mutations in the MTM1 gene cause X-linked myotubular myopathy (XLMTM), characterized by neonatal hypotonia and respiratory failure, and are responsible for a premature mortality in affected males.
X-linked myotubular myopathy (XLMTM) is a congenital neuromuscular disorder defined by severe hypotonia, respiratory failure and histopathologic changes in muscle biopsy.
Centronuclear (myotubular) myopathy (CNM) is congenital and produces various degrees of muscular weakness and associated complications such as respiratory failure.
Patients with XLMTM often have severe perinatal weakness that requires mechanical ventilation to prevent death from respiratory failure.
This review addresses hearing loss as it occurs and has been reported in Muenke syndrome as well as six additional FGFR related craniosynostosis syndromes (Apert syndrome, Pfeiffer syndrome, Crouzon syndrome, Beare-Stevenson syndrome, Crouzon syndrome with acanthosis nigricans, and Jackson-Weiss syndrome.
Our literature review revealed the following incidences of hearing loss in FGFR craniosynostoses: 61% in Muenke syndrome, 80% in Apert Syndrome, 92% in Pfeiffer syndrome, 74% in Crouzon syndrome, 68% in Jackson Weiss syndrome, 4% in Beare Stevenson syndrome and 14% in Crouzon syndrome with Acanthosis Nigricans.
This study reveals the pleiotropic effects of the FGFR2 Y394C mutation evidenced by cutis gyrata, acanthosis nigricans, and craniosynostosis and provides a useful model for investigating the molecular mechanisms of skin and skull development.
Some cases of congenital skeletal disorders with an FGFR2 mutation show skin phenotypes, including acne, cutis gyrata, and acanthosis nigricans.
Peripheral nerve and spinal cord injuries, along with other painful syndromes such as fibromyalgia, diabetic neuropathy, chemotherapeutic neuropathy, trigeminal neuralgia, complex regional pain syndrome, and/or irritable bowel syndrome, cause several neuroplasticity changes in the nervous system along its entire axis affecting the different neuronal nuclei.
Sortilin-related receptor with LDLR class A repeats (SORLA, SORL1, or LR11) is a genetic risk factor associated with Alzheimer's disease (AD).
A meta-analysis was performed to identify empirical data assessing the effects of a single nucleotide polymorphisms of sortilin-related receptor on Alzheimer's disease based on 14 studies involving 37941 cases and 49727 control studies.
Given these data, we provide crucial evidence to manifest that a significant relationship exists between SORL1 polymorphisms and the susceptibility of Alzheimer's disease.
Furthermore, a third SORL1 variant, c.5195G &gt; C, recently identified in a Swedish case control cohort included in the European Early-Onset Dementia (EU EOD) consortium study, was detected in two affected siblings in a third family with familial EOAD.
Thrombospondin-1 (TSP1) is a ligand for CD47 and TSP1-/- mice are protected from pulmonary hypertension (PH).
We further discuss therapeutic strategies for enhancing or inhibiting CD47 signaling and applications of such agents in preclinical models of ischemia and ischemia/reperfusion injuries, organ transplantation, pulmonary hypertension, radioprotection, and cancer.
In present study, anticancer activity of ethanol extract of Chinese propolis (EECP) at 25, 50, 100, and 200  my g/mL was explored by testing the cytotoxicity in MCF-7 (human breast cancer ER(+)) and MDA-MB-231 (human breast cancer ER(-)) cells.
We exposed human pancreatic cancer cell line MiaPaCa-2 (CRL-1420) to 34  my g/mL of LE for 24, 48, and 72 hours.
In addition, variations in JAG1 have been found to be associated with multiple types of cancer including breast cancer and adrenocortical carcinoma.
The role of the extract in pancreatic cancer treatment was associated with down-regulation of Notch-4 and Jagged-1 in Notch signaling pathway.
The patient was a 64-year-old man with situs inversus totalis who had previously undergone sigmoidectomy with regional lymphadenectomy for sigmoid colon cancer at age 62.
For the treatment of hepatic metastases from sigmoid colon cancer in a patient with situs inversus totalis, "left" hepatic lobectomy, partial hepatectomy, and radiofrequency ablation therapy were performed.
On day 25, pulmonary eosinophilia, airway hyperresponsiveness, mucus hypersecretion, inflammatory cytokines such as IL-4, -5 and -13 in BAL fluid, gene expression of inflammatory mediators such as 5-LOX, E-selectin, VCAM-1, CCL5, TNF-Alfa, AMCase, Ym2, YKL-40, Muc5ac, CCL2 and iNOS in animal lung tissues, and serum IgE were determined.
Our results show that tropical pulmonary eosinophilia mice exhibited increased levels of IL-4, IL-5, CCL5, and CCL11 in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid and lung parenchyma along with elevated titers of IgE and IgG subtypes in the serum.
A(2B) R deficiency resulted in a dramatic reduction on Th2-type airways responses with decreased pulmonary eosinophilia without augmenting neutrophilia, and decreased lung IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13 production.
Both isoforms caused pulmonary infiltration of lymphocytes and neutrophils, whereas mm IL-33 also caused pulmonary eosinophilia and goblet cell hyperplasia and increased expression of IL-4, IL-5, IL-13, IL-17, MCP-1, and KC.
Germline deficiency of the cell surface receptor chain ST2 abrogated the mm IL-33-induced Th2-associated effects (pulmonary eosinophilia, goblet cell hyperplasia, and increased IL-4 and IL-5), yet the lymphocytic infiltration induced by full-length mouse IL-33 or mm IL-33 was not fully abrogated by the absence of ST2.
OVA-challenged STAT6-/- mice had neither AHR nor pulmonary eosinophilia, but had increased expression of mRNA for TNF-Alfa, IFN-Gamma and IL-4.
GLP-1R agonists are used to treat diabetes and obesity, and a GLP-2R agonist is approved to treat short bowel syndrome.
RNA-seq analysis and quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) were performed to evaluate the presence of GLP-1R and GLP-2R in EAT and subcutaneous fat (SAT) obtained from 8 subjects with coronary artery disease and type 2 diabetes mellitus undergoing elective cardiac surgery.
Gastric tissue samples of non-obese patients (NOB, n=10) and obese patients without diabetes (OB, n=31) and with diabetes (OWD, n=12) were used to evaluate GLP2R expression and distribution.
This is the first evidence of increased GLP2R expression in chief cells of patients with severe obesity regardless of diabetes status.
We examined the importance of GLP-2 receptor (GLP-2R) signaling for glucose homeostasis in multiple models of metabolic stress, diabetes, and obesity.
Moreover, glucose homeostasis was comparable in Glp2r(-/-) and Glp2r(+/+) mice fed a high-fat diet for 5 months or after induction of streptozotocin-induced diabetes.
In a model of tubulointerstitial fibrosis induced by unilateral ureteral obstruction in mice, increased collagen I protein content and an almost complete disappearance of erythropoietin mRNA expression were observed in the ureteral ligated kidney with respect to the contralateral control.
In the present study, employing a mouse model of renal tubulointerstitial fibrosis induced by unilateral ureteral obstruction (UUO), we demonstrated that EPO markedly reduced the disruption of the tubular basement membrane (TBM) through attenuating the activation of tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) and matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP9), the major matrix proteolytic network in the obstructed kidney.
The MVs derived from untreated MSCs (MSC-MVs) or from MSCs incubated in different concentrations of EPO (1, 10, 100, and 500 IU/ml EPO-MVs) were used to treat renal injury of unilateral ureteral obstruction (UUO) in vivo, and transforming growth factor-Beta1 (TGF-Beta1)-induced fibrosis in a human renal proximal tubular epithelial (HK2) cell line in vitro.
Twenty-four male C57BL6 mice were randomly divided into four groups, each comprising six mice: (i) control group (Sh); (ii) unilateral ureteral obstruction (UUO) plus vehicle group (U+V); (#ⅲ) UUO plus 300 U/kg body weight recombinant human (rh)EPO (U+E1) and (#ⅳ) UUO plus 1,000 U/kg body weight rhEPO (U+E2).
The aim of this study is to show and compare the actions of Simvastatin (Simv) and Erythropoietin (Epo) in renal expression of nuclear factor kappa B (NFKB), transforming growth factor-Beta (TGF-Beta), basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF), platelet-derived growth factor B (PDGF-B), fibronectin and development of interstitial fibrosis in rats with unilateral ureteral obstruction (UUO).
In a novel mouse model, unilateral ureteral obstruction-induced inflammatory milieu activated NFKB and Smad signaling pathways in REPs, rapidly repressed the Epo-producing potential of REPs, and led to myofibroblast transformation of these cells.
Reversing the unilateral ureteral obstruction-induced inflammatory microenvironment restored the Epo-producing potential and the physiologic phenotype of REPs.
Secondary polycythemia with increased production of erythropoietin (EPO) is known to occur in kidney diseases such as hydronephrosis and cystic disease, but the mechanism remains unclear.
Decompartmentalized hemoglobin, arginase 1, asymmetric dimethylarginine, and adenine nucleotides are all products of hemolysis that promote vasomotor dysfunction, proliferative vasculopathy, and a multitude of clinical complications of pulmonary and systemic vasculopathy, including pulmonary hypertension, leg ulcers, priapism, chronic kidney disease, and large-artery ischemic stroke.
We report a patient with bilateral incyclotorsion, asymmetric facial palsy, monocular depression deficiency, and unilateral Type 3 Duane syndrome, along with contralateral anotia and a midline cleft palate.
The authors report a child with features of Cardiofacial syndrome with anotia and facial paralysis.
Thirty-three cases had microtia or anotia, and all instances of facial palsy were associated with auricular malformation.
A girl was born with anotia, facial palsy and cardiac malformations.
Freshly isolated LSECs, Kupffer cells (KCs), and stabilin-1- and stabilin-2-transfected human embryonic kidney cells were incubated with fluorescently labeled or radiolabeled oxLDLs [oxidized for 3 h (oxLDL(3)), 6 h, or 24 h (oxLDL(24))] to measure endocytosis.
Furthermore, pleiotrophin (PTN), an endogenous ligand of Ptprz, also induced gastritis specifically in Ptprz+/+ mice when administered orally.
We aimed to determine whether serum levels of Krebs von den Lungen-6 (KL-6) and surfactant protein-D (SP-D) correlate with SSc/MCTD-associated ILD activity.
Serum KL-6 correlated positively with diffusing capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide (DLCO) (% predicted) and disease extent on HRCT, and the changes in serum levels of KL-6 were significantly related to the changes in forced vital capacity (FVC) in SSc/MCTD-associated ILD.
Our study suggests that serum KL-6 can be a useful monitoring tool of SSc/MCTD-associated ILD activity.
The KL-6 levels did not differ significantly according to the connective tissue diseases in the diagnostic groups (systemic lupus erythematosus, Sjoegren's syndrome, rheumatoid arthritis, mixed connective tissue disease, scleroderma, polymyositis/ dermatomyositis).
To quantify and compare human mucin 1 (MUC1) protein and mRNA expression in tears and conjunctival epithelial cells collected from Sjogren's syndrome (SS), non-Sjogren's keratoconjunctivitus sicca (KCS) and non-dry eyed (NDE) control subjects.
We studied 21 patients referred for idiopathic short stature, 5 with clinically suspected hypochondroplasia and 4 with achondroplasia.
A series of 140 patients with short stature operated on for limb lengthening (80 had achondroplasia, 20 had hypochondroplasia, 20 had Turner syndrome, 10 had idiopathic short stature due to an undemonstrated cause, 5 regarded their stature as too short, and 5 had a psychopathic personality due to dysmorphophobia that had developed because of their short stature) was reviewed.
In the present study, we investigated whether the impairment of IRS-1-mediated insulin signaling contributes to neurite outgrowth and neuronal loss, both in mice fed a high-fat diet and in mouse neuroblastoma (Neuro2A) cells.
To investigate the changes caused by the inhibition of IRS-1-mediated insulin signaling in neuroblastoma cells, we performed Western blot analysis, reverse transcription-PCR, and immunochemical analysis.
miR-145 might act as a tumor suppressor in uveal melanoma, and downregulation of the target IRS-1 might be a potential mechanism.
Almost a decade ago, we reported the presence of nuclear IRS-1 in medulloblastoma clinical samples, which express viral oncoprotein, large T-antigen of human polyomavirus JC (JCV T-antigen).
More recently, nuclear IRS-1 was detected in breast cancer cells in association with estrogen receptor alpha (ERAlfa), and in JC virus negative medulloblastoma cells expressing estrogen receptor beta (ERBeta), further implicating nuclear IRS-1 in cellular transformation.
We have previously reported that ERBeta, which is highly expressed in medulloblastomas, translocates insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS-1) to the nucleus, and that nuclear IRS-1 binds to Rad51 and attenuates homologous recombination directed DNA repair (HRR).
Jacobsen syndrome (JBS) is a contiguous gene deletion syndrome involving terminal chromosome 11q.
We investigated a boy with features of JBS using classic cytogenetic methods, FISH and high-resolution array CGH.
The patient had a hemizygous deletion in the FLI1 gene region without apparent thrombocytopenia, and he developed diabetes mellitus type I, which has not previously been described in the spectrum of disorders associated with JBS.
The relationship of some of the genes within the context of the phenotype caused by a partial deletion of 11q has provided insights concerning the developmental anomalies presented in this patient with atypical features of JBS.
All local patients were clustered "high-risk" for future CV events based on the Framingham score (mean 21.8%, 95% CI 20.0-23.6), JBS-2 (16.3%, 14.7-17.9) and ASSIGN (25.2%, 22.7-27.7).
Loss-of-function mutations in the UBR1 gene cause Johanson-Blizzard syndrome, which involves pancreatic exocrine insufficiency.
No previous studies have examined an association of UBR1 variants with pancreatitis, in part due to the large size of the gene.
This study aimed to clarify whether UBR1 variants are associated with chronic pancreatitis (CP) by the application of targeted next generation sequencing.
Jacobsen syndrome (JBS) is a contiguous gene deletion syndrome involving 11q terminal deletion.
Interstitial deletions at distal 11q are rare and their contributions to the clinical phenotype of JBS are unknown.
Our finds support the notion that more than one critical region at 11q23.3-qter are responsible for the variable clinical presentation of JBS, thus JBS is a true contiguous gene deletion syndrome where multiple loci contributed to the clinical characteristics of JBS.
Jacobsen syndrome (JBS) is an uncommon contiguous gene syndrome.
The typical clinical features in JBS include intellectual disability, growth retardation, craniofacial dysmorphism as well as craniosynostosis, congenital heart disease, and platelet abnormalities.
We report a novel deletion in JBS that increases the knowledge of the variability in the mutation sites in this region and expands the spectrum of molecular and clinical defects in this syndrome.
Johanson-Blizzard syndrome (JBS) is considered as an infrequent, but clinically easily recognizable autosomal recessive entity by the pathognomonic combination of congenital exocrine pancreatic insufficiency and hypoplastic alae nasi, in addition to other distinctive findings such as scalp defects, hypothyroidism, and rectourogenital malformations.
There are few reports of patients with JBS in association with facial clefting, referring all to types 2 to 6 of Tessier's classification that can be characterized properly as oblique facial clefts (OFCs).
We describe the clinical aspects in four patients with JBS and extensive OFCs.
In all of them, the diagnosis of JBS was confirmed by the demonstration of homozygous or compound-heterozygous mutations in the UBR1 gene.
Additionally, we review three previously reported cases of JBS with OFCs.
Taking into account a number of approximately 100 individuals affected by JBS that have been published in the literature we estimate that the frequency of OFCs in JBS is between 5% and 10%.
This report emphasizes that extensive OFCs may be the severe end of the spectrum of facial malformations occurring in JBS.
Jacobsen syndrome (JBS) is a rare congenital disorder caused by a terminal deletion of the long arm of chromosome 11.
PX-RICS is located in the chromosomal region commonly deleted in JBS patients with autistic-like behaviour.
Our findings demonstrate a critical role of PX-RICS in cognition and suggest a causal link between PX-RICS deletion and ASD-like behaviour in JBS patients.
Johanson-Blizzard Syndrome (JBS) (MIM #243800) is a rare autosomal recessive genetic disorder characterized by exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, abnormal facial appearance and varying degrees of mental retardation.
Here, we report a 3 year-old mentally normal JBS girl.
With these findings, JBS diagnosis was established clinically.
Joubert syndrome (JBS) is a rare neurodevelopmental disorder belonging to the group of ciliary diseases.
JBS is genetically heterogeneous, with &gt;20 causative genes identified to date.
A molecular diagnosis of JBS is essential for prediction of disease progression and genetic counseling.
We developed a targeted next-generation sequencing (NGS) approach for parallel sequencing of 22 known JBS genes plus 599 additional ciliary genes.
This method was used to genotype a cohort of 51 well-phenotyped Northern European JBS cases (in some of the cases, Sanger sequencing of individual JBS genes had been performed previously).
Altogether, 21 of the 51 cases (41%) harbored biallelic pathogenic mutations in known JBS genes, including 14 mutations not previously described.
Our study represents a population-based cohort of JBS patients not enriched for consanguinity, providing insight into the relative importance of the different JBS genes in a Northern European population.
Furthermore, we report a case with heterozygous mutations in CC2D2A and B9D1, a gene associated with the more severe Meckel-Gruber syndrome that was recently published as a potential new JBS gene, and discuss the significance of this finding.
ZIC2 and OVOL1 may function in nasopharyngeal carcinoma through targeting significantly up-regulated genes (such as PTGS2, FN1, CXCL9 and CXCL10) in the Transcription factor-differentially expressed gene regulatory network (e.g., ZIC2-&gt;PTGS2 and OVOL1-&gt;CXCL10).
PTGS2, FN1, CXCL9, CXCL10, ZIC2 and OVOL1 might play roles in nasopharyngeal carcinoma.
Literature data indicate that hyperprolactinemia (HPRL) is one of the important factors in the pathogenesis and course of autoimmune diseases such as systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, systemic sclerosis and Sjogren's syndrome.
Furthermore in the last 2 decades multi-organ and organ specific autoimmune diseases like systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), rheumatoid arthritis (RA), Sjogren's syndrome (SS), Hashimoto's thyroiditis (HT), multiple sclerosis (MS), psoriasis, hepatitis C patients, Behcet's disease, peripartum cardiomyopathy (PPCM) and active celiac disease were discussed to be associated with HPRL.
Hyperprolactinemia (HPRL) is observed in multi-organ and organ specific autoimmune diseases like systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) rheumatoid arthritis (RA), Sjogren's syndrome (SS), Hashimoto's thyroiditis (HT) and multiple sclerosis (MS).
We describe the role of PRL in the pathogenesis of rheumatic diseases, particularly connective tissue diseases, including systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), rheumatoid arthritis (RA), primary Sjoegren's syndrome, systemic sclerosis, polymyalgia rheumatica, and seronegative arthritis.
Moreover, we show that the reduction of eosinophilia and the recruitment of inflammatory monocytes to the lungs required early triggering of TLR9, IFN-Gamma and CCR2 by immunotherapy components.
Subjects treated with TLR9 agonists were at a higher risk of anemia (risk ratio [RR] 1.04, 95% confidence interval [CI]: 1.02-1.06), neutropenia (RR 1.16, 95% CI: 1.11-1.21), leukopenia (RR 1.16, 95% CI: 1.11-1.22), lymphopenia (RR 1.17, 95% CI: 1.10-1.25), thrombocytopenia (RR 1.20, 95% CI: 1.14-1.27), flu-like symptoms (RR 10.59, 95% CI: 3.66-30.66), diarrhea (RR 1.40, 95% CI: 1.18-1.67) and headache (RR 1.61, 95% CI: 1.26-2.06).
Both the TLR7 and TLR9 agonists dose dependently reduced airway eosinophilia, while the TLR3 agonist only reduced airway eosinophilia at a dose of 1.0 mg/kg.
&lt;p&gt;Lichen planopilaris (LPP) is a variant of lichen planus that affects the scalp causing scarring hair loss.
This family of diseases contains 2 subgroups, largely based on clinical features: keratosis pilaris atrophicans (KPA; including keratosis pilaris atrophicans faciei/ulerythema ophryogenes, atrophoderma vermiculata, and keratosis follicularis spinulosa decalvans); and the lichen planopilaris (LPP) subgroup (including LPP, frontal fibrosing alopecia, Graham-Little-Piccardi-Lassueur Syndrome and fibrosing alopecia in a pattern distribution).
An interface dermatitis with lichenoid inflammation is characteristic of the LPP group of disorders, but the literature provides scant information about the histopathology of the KPA group.
Recently, there have been25 cases reported in the literature of lichen planuspigmentosus (LPPi) that preceded the developmentof frontal fibrosing alopecia (FFA), which is a variantof lichen planopilaris (LPP).
Lower levels of acylCer and LPP accompany skin diseases, such as atopic dermatitis, lamellar ichthyosis, and psoriasis.
A number of associations such as hepatitis C virus infection, frontal fibrosing alopecia, acrokeratosis of Bazex and nephrotic syndrome have been reported with LPP.
Lichen planopilaris (LPP) is a follicular variant of lichen planus.
However, genes like HSP90, PAK2, CD247 and others included in the first 1% of the prioritized list need to be further explored in preeclampsia pathogenesis through experimental approaches.
We report a case of acute pancreatitis with diabetic ketoacidosis associated with increased serum myoglobin concentration, acute renal failure, and disseminated intravascular coagulation.
We examined the relationship among acute pancreatitis, diabetic ketoacidosis, and hypermyoglobinemia in the literature.
The frequency of nontraumatic rhabdomyolysis in diabetic ketoacidosis was investigated by serial measurements of the serum levels of myoglobin and the serum activity of creatine kinase isoenzyme MM in 12 consecutively admitted ketoacidotic patients.
In conclusion, our findings suggest that nontraumatic rhabdomyolysis with hypermyoglobinaemia and elevated serum activity of creatine kinase isoenzyme MM may be a hitherto unrecognized common feature of diabetic ketoacidosis.
Numerous studies have confirmed the carcinogenic role of HMGN5 in cancer, but its function in the regulation of chemosensitivity is largely unknown and controversial.
A previous study by the authors of the present study demonstrated that HMGN5 contributes to the progression of urothelial bladder cancer (UBC) through regulating the expression of E-cadherin and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-C, which are associated with the sensitivity of tumor cells to cisplatin.
Bioinformatics and luciferase reporter assays demonstrated that miR-495 targets the 3'-untranslated region of high-mobility group nucleosome-binding domain 5 (HMGN5), a potential oncogene in various types of cancers.
High-mobility group nucleosome-binding domain 5 (HMGN5), a well-known oncogene in gliomas, was identified as a functional target of miR-409-3p using bioinformatics, dual-luciferase reporter assay, real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction, and Western blot analysis.
Restoration of HMGN5 expression significantly reversed the inhibitory effects of miR-409-3p overexpression on glioma cell invasion and proliferation.
Taken together, our results suggest that miR-409-3p inhibits glioma cell invasion and proliferation by targeting HMGN5, representing a potential therapeutic target for glioma.
It was first discovered in mouse, and recent studies found that the expressions of HMGN5 in many human cancers were also highly regulated, such as prostate, bladder, breast, and lung and clear cell renal cell carcinoma.
Importantly, deficiency of HMGN5 has been shown to be linked to cancer cell growth, cell cycle regulation, migration, invasion, and clinical outcomes, and it represents a promising therapeutic target for many malignant tumors.
In the present review, we provide an overview of the current knowledge concerning the role of HMGN5 in cancer development and progression.
Nucleosome-binding protein 1 (NSBP1) has been suggested as an oncogene in various types of human cancers.
We found that NSBP1 was highly expressed in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells, and knockdown of NSBP1 by NSBP1 small interfering RNA (siRNA) significantly suppressed NSCLC cell proliferation and invasion.
Overexpression of miR-326 significantly inhibited NSCLC cell proliferation and invasion, which mimicked the effect of NSBP1 siRNA.
Furthermore, suppression of NSBP1 by NSBP1 siRNA or miR-326 overexpression remarkably repressed the expression of cyclin B1 and matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP9), which are associated with cancer cell proliferation and invasion.
In addition, an inverse correlation between miR-326 and NSBP1 expression levels was found in NSCLC clinical specimens.
Our study demonstrated a direct target relationship between NSBP1 and miR-326 through which miR-326 inhibited cell proliferation and invasion of NSCLC cells.
Thus, miR-326-NSBP1 is a promising candidate target for developing novel anticancer therapeutics for NSCLC.
Correlation analysis also showed that HMGN5 expression levels were significantly inversely correlated with the miR-340 expression in prostate cancer tissues.
In addition, overexpression of HMGN5 significantly reversed the inhibitory effect of miR-340 on prostate cancer cell proliferation and invasion.
Moreover, the decreased miR-340 expression may contribute to the development and progression of prostate cancer through a mechanism that involves HMGN5.
Thus, miR340 and its target gene HMGN5 can serve as potentially useful therapeutic candidates for prostate cancer treatment.
The high-mobility group nucleosome-binding protein-5 (HMGN5) is frequently overexpressed in various malignant cancers.
However, the potential correlation between HMGN5 and prognosis in patients with meningiomas remains unknown.
In the present study, we explored the expression of HMGN5 in meningiomas with immunohistochemistry and correlated the results to the patient outcome.
We demonstrate that there is a positive association between HMGN5 expression and meningioma histological grade.
Statistical analysis reveals that lower HMGN5 expression predict lower meningioma recurrence.
Our results further revealed that HMGN5 inhibition decreased P-glycoprotein (MDR-1) expression without affecting multidrug resistance associated proteins 1 (MRP-1) expression to increase chemosensitivity to temozolomide (TMZ) of meningioma cells.
Collectively, this study indicates that HMGN5 is a novel target for developing effective therapeutic strategies for malignant meningiomas.
In this study, we show that TK1 is upregulated and localizes on the plasma membrane of Burkitt's lymphoma, acute promyelocytic leukemia, T cell leukemia, and acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL).
TK1 has been reported as a reliable prognostic factor in solid tumors and chronic lymphocytic leukemia, but has not yet been tested in large populations of patients with non-Hodgkin lymphoma.
In this study, the prognostic significance of TK1 levels was assessed in 170 prospectively enrolled patients with previously untreated follicular lymphoma (FL).
The TK1 level at the time of treatment initiation was shown to correlate with the clinical stage, Follicular Lymphoma International Prognostic Index (FLIPI) score, Beta(2)-microglobulin level, lactate dehydrogenase level and B symptoms.
We show that high serum TK1 levels predict poorer overall survival and correlate with unmutated immunoglobulin variable region genes, CD38 and ZAP-70 expression, and subsequent risk of developing large B-cell lymphoma (Richter syndrome).
In the present study, we revealed that the Hippo transducer, the transcriptional coactivator with PDZ-binding motif (TAZ), acts as a downstream mediator of PODXL in colon cancer.
Moreover, PODXL plays a critical role in cancer stemness, invasiveness, and sensitivity to chemotherapies in colon cancer HCT15 cells.
Notably, expression of PODXL showed a positive correlation with stem-like and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) core signatures, and was associated with poor survival outcomes in patients with colon cancer.
These findings provide novel insights into the molecular mechanism of PODXL-mediated tumorigenesis in colon cancer.
Podocalyxin (PODXL), which belongs to the CD34 family and regulates cell morphology, has been linked to EMT in lung cancer, and PODXL overexpression is associated with poor prognosis in several different classes of cancers.
The aim of this study was to clarify the role of PODXL overexpression in EMT in lung cancer, and to determine the prognostic value of PODXL overexpression in tumors from lung cancer patients.
The morphology, EMT marker expression, and migration and invasion abilities of engineered A549 PODXL-knockdown (KD) or PODXL-overexpression (OE) lung adenocarcinoma cells were examined.
PODXL expression levels were assessed by immunohistochemistry in 114 human clinical lung adenocarcinoma specimens and correlated with clinical outcomes.
A highly selective inhibitor of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-Akt signaling attenuated EMT of PODXL-OE cells, while a transforming growth factor inhibitor did not, suggesting that PODXL induces EMT of lung adenocarcinoma cells via the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase pathway.
In lung adenocarcinoma clinical specimens, PODXL expression was detected in minimally invasive and invasive adenocarcinoma, but not in non-invasive adenocarcinoma.
PODXL overexpression induces EMT in lung adenocarcinoma and contributes to tumor progression.
The aim of this study was to investigate the impact of PODXL expression on survival in esophageal and gastric adenocarcinoma.
In gastric adenocarcinoma, patients with PODXL negative tumors had a superior TTR and a trend towards an improved OS.
In esophageal and gastric adenocarcinoma combined, the prognostic significance of PODXL expression on TTR was confirmed in unadjusted Cox regression analysis (HR = 5.36, 95 % CI 1.68-17.06, p = 0.005) and remained significant in the adjusted model (HR = 3.39, 95 % CI 1.01-11.35, p = 0.048).
In esophageal and gastric adenocarcinoma, PODXL expression is an independent prognostic biomarker for reduced time to recurrence and poor overall survival.
Here, we report that high PODXL expression was an independent predictor of worse overall survival of pancreatic cancer patients, and that PODXL promoted pancreatic cancer cell motility and invasion by physically binding to the cytoskeletal protein gelsolin.
Furthermore, transfection of a PODXL-rescue construct into pancreatic cancer cells in which both PODXL and gelsolin were suppressed failed to increase the formation of the protrusions.
Podocalyxin-like 1 (PODXL) is an anti-adhesive transmembrane protein that has been demonstrated to be an independent factor of poor prognosis in colorectal cancer (CRC).
In addition, we identified a possible target of miR-5100, podocalyxin-like 1 (PODXL), and demonstrated miR-5100 directly binds to the 3' untranslated region of PODXL and post-transcriptionally regulates its expression in pancreatic cancer cells.
We also clarified the close relationship between expression of PODXL in human pancreatic cancer specimens and liver metastasis (P=0.0003), and determined that post-operative survival was longer in the low-PODXL expression group than in the high-PODXL expression group (P&lt;0.05).
These results indicate that miR-5100 and PODXL have considerable therapeutic potential for anti-metastatic therapy and could be potential indicators for cancer metastases in patients with pancreatic cancer.
Previously we demonstrated that miR-199b was significantly downregulated in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and targets podocalyxin and discoidin domain receptor 1.
Therefore, we set out to determine if podocalyxin plays a functional role in breast tumor progression.
Forced overexpression of podocalyxin caused cohesive clusters of epithelial MCF-7 breast tumor cells to bud off from the primary tumor and collectively invade the stroma of the mouse mammary gland in vivo.
The DEGs MAPT, DSTN, SPTBN1, ARHGEF2 and SKA1 are suggested to be candidate biomarkers for childhood obesity.
All received support and advice by community Diabetes Specialist Nurses (DSNs) and Dieticians covering Central and Eastern Cheshire, UK.
In 2009, the PCT confirmed 3 years funding for a Paediatric Diabetes specialist nurse (PDSN) for schools.
The aim of this study was to explore the interaction between diabetes specialist nurses (DSNs) and patients with type 2 diabetes (T2D) during group sessions about self-management.
In 8 Italian municipalities, 2,512 men and women without both diabetes and CI-DSN at baseline are examined.
The majority (72%) of PHCCs had diabetes-responsible general practitioners (GPs) and almost all (97%) had diabetes specialist nurses (DSNs) with some degree of postgraduate education in diabetes.
The PHCCs reported that they used regional/local diabetes guidelines (93%), were engaged in call-recall diabetic reviews by GP(s) (66%) and DSN(s) (89%), checked that patients had participated in the reviews by GP(s) (69%) and DSN(s) (78%), arranged group education programmes (23%) and reported data to a National Diabetes Register (82%).
The presence of diabetes-responsible GP(s) and DSN(s) who use guidelines may contribute to good and equal quality of care.
To review the working practices of UK diabetes specialist nurses (DSNs), specific clinical roles, and to examine changes since 2000.
Postal questionnaires were sent to lead DSNs from all identifiable UK diabetes centres (n = 361).
Quantitative and qualitative data were collected on the specific clinical roles, employment, and continual professional development of hospital and community DSNs, Nurse Consultants and Diabetes Healthcare Assistants.
22% of DSNs have a formal role in diabetes research compared with 48% in 2000.
Patients were recruited from 40 general practices and randomised (40:40:20 ratio) to receive routine care alone or, in addition, motivational telephone support from a peer supporter or a diabetes specialist nurse (9 peers and 12 DSNs) for a period of up to 6 months.
We exposed the human NSCLC cell lines Calu-1, CL3, H1299, CH27, H23, and H1355 to B[a]P and assessed cell cycle progression using flow cytometry.
Moreover, DOX-loaded micelles could slowly and efficiency decrease cell viability of non-small-cell lung carcinoma CL3 cells.
Comet assay was used to evaluate the DNA damage induced by a relatively low dose of COF (100 g/ml) in human lung adenocarcinoma CL-3 cells.
Pb(II) increased the phosphorylated ERK1/2 and phosphorylated AKT but not the phosphorylated ERK5, phosphorylated p38 and JNK activity in human non-small cell lung adenocarcinoma CL3 cells.
The results from reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction showed that the hOGG1 mRNA expression was induced by hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) and COF in human lung adenocarcinoma CL-3 cells.
To reveal the relationship between the high mortality rate of lung cancer in Chinese women and exposure to cooking oil fumes (COF), DNA adduct formation, induced by COF collected from frying fish under domestic conditions, was assessed in human lung adenocarcinoma CL-3 cell lines using the (32)P-postlabeling assay.
In this study we have explored the involvement of oxidative stress in Cr(VI)-induced JNK, p38 and ERK signaling pathways and their effects on Cr(VI) cytotoxicity in human non-small cell lung carcinoma CL3 cells.
The expression pattern of mucin genes was studied in 7 lung adenocarcinoma cell lines (CL1, CL2, CL3, NCL2, PC9, PC13, PC14) and 12 lung adenocarcinoma tissues.
Osteogenesis imperfecta model, oim(-/-) , mice have a defect in the collagen, which leads to brittle bone; PHOSPHO1 mutants, Phospho1(-/-) , have ductile bone resulting from altered mineralization.
Because two mammalian isoforms of iPLA2 (iPLA2beta and iPLA2gamma) have been cloned and characterized, the aim of this study was to identify the specific isoform(s) in macrophages that regulates the expression of iNOS in response to virus infection.
cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) is one downstream target of iPLA2 that is required for the transcriptional activation of iNOS in response to virus infection, and consistent with the effects of BEL enantiomers on iNOS expression, (S)-BEL more effectively inhibits EMCV-induced CREB phosphorylation than (R)-BEL in macrophages.
Using macrophages isolated from iPLA2beta-null mice, virus infection fails to stimulate iNOS mRNA accumulation and protein expression, thus providing genetic evidence that iPLA2beta is required for EMCV-induced iNOS expression.
Specific attention will be placed on the ability of virus infection to activate multiple signaling cascades (such as PKR, MAPK, iPLA2, NF-kappaB) and how these pathways are integrated in the regulation of individual target gene expression.
In comparison with PRCC1, PRCC2 cases showed upregulated expression of Alfa5-integrin (ITGA5) whereas the expression of Alfa6- (ITGA6) and Beta8-integrins (ITGB8) was downregulated.
HFD-fed mice lacking Cnot7 and Tob express elevated levels of Ucp1 mRNA in iWAT and are resistant to diet-induced obesity.
Thus, the Cnot7-Tob-BRF1 axis inhibits Ucp1 expression and contributes to obesity.
Since abnormal and unbalanced JAK/STAT activation is associated with immune disorders and cancer, hCAF1 could play a major role in innate immunity and oncogenesis, contributing to tumour escape.
Our previous study (Nakamura et al., 2004) showed that deletion of the Cnot7 gene in mice caused almost no abnormal phenotypes except for male infertility, due to oligo-astheno-teratozoospermia.
Mutations in the gene encoding the neural cell adhesion molecule L1CAM cause several neurological disorders collectively referred to as L1 syndrome.
A 59-year-old woman receiving methotrexate and tacrolimus for rheumatoid arthritis (RA) was referred to our hospital following bilateral ground-glass opacity observed in her chest X-ray and elevated serum KL-6.
During treatment of rheumatoid arthritis (RA)-associated interstitial lung disease (ILD) with prednisolone, chest image findings improved in association with decreased KL-6 levels.
The results showed that treatment with the MUC1-MBP/BCG anti-tumor vaccine did not cause any organ toxicity, except for arthritis or local nodules induced by BCG in several rats.
To investigate leptin, adiponectin, soluble intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (sICAM-1), soluble vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (sVCAM-1) levels and their relationship with each other and metabolic parameters in women with polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS).
Non-insulin resistant PCOS had significantly higher adiponectin and sVCAM-1 levels.
Increases in IL-6 and TNF-Alfa and adhesion molecules (E-selectin, ICAM-1 and VCAM-1) were also observed, particularly in the PCOS IR group, providing evidence that inflammation and oxidative stress are related in PCOS patients.
Inflammation in PCOS induces leukocyte-endothelium interactions and a simultaneous increase in IL-6, TNF-Alfa, E-selectin, ICAM-1 and VCAM-1.
In conclusion, we disclosed a novel mechanism that JQ1 inhibits cell proliferation, induces cell senescence and apoptosis of chondrosarcoma cells through the regulation of the YAP/p21/c-Myc/Bcl-xL signaling axis.
BH-3 mimetics ABT-737 and ABT-263 are synthetic small-molecule inhibitors of anti-apoptotic proteins B-cell lymphoma-2 (Bcl2) and Bcl-xL, which play a critical role in survival of chondrosarcoma cells.
Here we show that the IHh signal pathway was activated in chondrosarcoma, and knocking down the expression of Gli1 attenuated the disturbed IHh signal pathway, which not only suppressed cell proliferation and promoted G2/M cell cycle arrest but also enhanced cell apoptosis by downregulating Bcl-2 and Bcl-xl expression.
As in conventional chondrosarcoma, antiapoptotic proteins (Bcl-2, and/or Bcl-xl) were highly expressed in all subtypes.
BPB induced upregulation of Bax, Bad and Bak, downregulation of Bcl-2, Bid and Bcl-XL and dysfunction of mitochondria in chondrosarcoma.
EGCG induced upregulation of Bax and Bak, downregulation of Bcl-2 and Bcl-XL, and dysfunction of mitochondria in chondrosarcoma.
FPTB induced up-regulation of Bax and Bak, down-regulation of Bcl-2 and Bcl-XL and dysfunction of mitochondria in chondrosarcoma.
This study aims to investigate the expression patterns of HIF-1Alfa in chondrosarcoma, and its association with clinicopathologic features, Bcl-xL expression, apoptosis index (AI), and overall survival of patients with chondrosarcoma.
In eight patients with chondrosarcoma, increased expression of HIF-1Alfa and Bcl-xL was detected in chondrosarcoma tissues compared with the paired adjacent normal tissues.
These findings suggest that increased HIF-1Alfa levels mediated up-regulation of Bcl-xL play a prominent role in evasion of apoptosis and tumor progression, and can be predictive for the prognosis in human chondrosarcoma.
Three-dimensional speckle tracking echocardiography (3D-STE) was used to evaluate the improvement of continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion on the left ventricular (LV) systolic function of patients with type 2 diabetes mellitu (T2DM).
To elucidate association of renal dysfunction (RD) with unfavorable outcomes of in-hospital and long-term (1 year) treatment stages of patients with ST-elevation (STE) myocardial infarction (MI) and concomitant diabetes mellitus (DM).
Multivariate regression analysis showed that GPLS and diabetes mellitus were independent predictors for complex NSTE-ACS.
No differences were observed between the two groups in baseline characteristics; except AS-STEMI group had more patients with diabetes and EA-STEMI group had more patients with family history of coronary artery disease.
To elucidate association of renal dysfunction (RD) with unfavorable outcomes of in-hospital and long-term (1 year) treatment stages of patients with ST-elevation (STE) myocardial infarction (M) and concomitant diabetes mellitus (DM).
Incidence of complicated diabetes (P &lt; 0.05), pre-PCI Killip &gt;= II (55.9% (19/34) vs. 26.8% (15/56), P &lt; 0.05) and multivessel disease (70.6% (24/34) vs. 35.7% (20/56), P &lt; 0.05) were significantly higher in group D than in group C. TIMI 3 and the opening time of IRA was similar between group A and group B and between group C and group D. The incidence of in-hospital MACE was significantly higher in group B than in group A (14.4% (13/90) vs. 3.0% (4/135), P &lt; 0.05) which was similar between group C and group D. Early (1 hour) but not late (24 hours) ST resolution post PCI is related to a favorable clinical outcome in STEMI patients.
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) and Western blotting were performed to evaluate SOX4 expression between OLP and OLP-OSCC tissues and among oral cancer cell lines and normal human oral keratinocytes (NHOKs).
LC-MS/MS analysis showed that 88 proteins including SOX4 were only identified in OLP-OSCC FFPE tissues when compared to OLP FFPE tissues.
IHC confirmed that SOX4 expression was significantly higher in OLP-OSCC than OLP and Western blot analysis indicated that SOX4 was over-expressed in UM1/UM2 cells when compared to NHOKs.
Our study indicated that SOX4 is significantly upregulated in OLP-OSCC versus OLP tissues.
These findings suggest that SOX4 might be actively involved in the progression of OLP to OSCC.
This study evaluated whether SOX4 affects oncogenic behavior and chemoradiotherapy response in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) cells, and documented the relationship between its expression and prognosis in oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC).
SOX4 expression in OSCC tissues was investigated by immunohistochemistry.
Immunostaining showed SOX4 protein was significantly increased in OSCC tissues compared with adjacent normal mucosa.
SOX4 expression was observed in 51.8 % of 85 OSCC tissues, and was significantly correlated with treatment failure (P = 0.032) and shorter overall survival (P = 0.036) in patients with OSCC.
This study was the first to investigate correlations between SOX4 expression levels and the clinicopathologic factors of oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC).
We analyzed SOX4 expression levels in 50 patients with OSCC using immunohistochemistry.
The expression level of SOX4 in primary foci of poorly differentiated OSCC was higher than that of well differentiated OSCC, which indicated that SOX4 expression is associated with the differentiation of OSCC.
These results indicate that undifferentiated OSCC cells expressing SOX4 are more likely to metastasize and neoadjuvant therapy including chemoradiation therapy may have some effect in metastatic prevention.
Cryptorchidism was significantly associated with development of MGCSCTs, SCTs, and SEMs, but not ICTs (p&lt;0.01).
Since nerve functions are affected by inflammatory response during the course of leprosy, changes in the production of NGF and its receptor (NGF R) may be directly associated with disability and sensory loss.
Skin biopsies were collected and submitted to immunohistochemistry using specific antibodies to IL-17, NGF and NGF R. Quantitative analysis of NGF, NGFR and IL-17 immunostaining showed a significant difference between the clinical forms, with higher expression of NGF and NGFR in lepromatous leprosy and IL-17 in tuberculoid leprosy.
The recovered CD271(+) BM-MSCs from post-therapy mice, when injected into healthy mice, caused active tuberculosis infection in the animal's lung.
Next, in human subjects, previously treated for pulmonary tuberculosis, the MTB-containing CD271(+) BM-MSCs exhibited high expression of hypoxia-inducible factor 1Alfa and low expression of CD146, a hypoxia down-regulated cell surface marker of human BM-MSCs.
The bone marrow niche of Mycobacterium tuberculosis within CD271(+) BM-MSCs stem cells is the proposed explanation for the localized cortical resorption that is observed in bone stress markers.
Therefore, the objective of this study was to correlate the immunoexpression patterns of NGF and NGF-R in the different clinical forms of leprosy, and to associate the findings with the in situ expression of TGF-Beta and clinical classification of the disease.
There was a significant positive correlation between NGF and NGF-R in the different clinical forms of leprosy.
Moreover, most viable M. tuberculosis was recovered from the bone marrow CD271(+)CD45(-)-enriched cell fraction, and only few viable bacteria could be isolated from the CD271(-)CD45(+) cell fraction.
Inhibition of the interaction between p53 and MDM2/MDMX has attracted significant attention in anticancer therapy development.
MdmX overexpression contributes to the development of cancer by inhibiting tumor suppressor p53.
A switch in the alternative splicing of MdmX transcript, leading to the inclusion of exon 6, has been identified as the primary mechanism responsible for increased MdmX protein levels in human cancers, including melanoma.
Recent studies showed that interfering with cellular splicing machinery can result in MdmX downregulation in cancer cells.
We, therefore, hypothesized that enoxacin could, by modulating miRNAs targeting splicing machinery, activate p53 in melanoma cells overexpressing MdmX.
Not only in melanoma, but also in MCF7 breast carcinoma and A2780 ovarian carcinoma cells overexpressing MdmX.
Together, our results suggest that some clinically approved fluoroquinolones could potentially be repurposed as activators of p53 tumor suppressor in cancers overexpressing MdmX oncoprotein and that p53 activation might contribute to the previously reported activity of enoxacin towards human cancer cells.
These will be discussed as will recent findings of MDMX inhibitors: these are of special importance as it has been shown that cancers that become resistant to MDM2 inhibitors often amplify MDM4.
Our recent studies conducted in South America have shown that mycotoxin contamination of red chili peppers (RCPs) may be associated with an increased risk of gallbladder cancer (GBC).
Three proteins were uniquely altered in vaginal carcinoma (DDX48, erbB3-binding protein and biliverdin reductase) and five in cervical carcinoma (peroxiredoxin 2, annexin A2, sarcomeric tropomyosin kappa, human ribonuclease inhibitor and prolyl-4-hydrolase beta).
Mitochondrial (mt) DNA-associated NARP (neurogenic muscle weakness, ataxia, and retinitis pigmentosa) syndrome is due to mutation in the MT-ATP6 gene.
Pathogenic mutations in MT-ATP6 are associated with the Leigh syndrome, the syndrome of neuropathy, ataxia, and retinitis pigmentosa (NARP), as well as with non-classical phenotypes, while MT-ATP8 is less frequently mutated in patients with mitochondrial disease.
Analysis of these populations demonstrated an altered metabolic signature in cells harbouring decreased levels of mutant m.8993T&gt;G mtDNA, associated with neuropathy, ataxia, and retinitis pigmentosa (NARP).
Neurogenic muscle weakness, ataxia, and retinitis pigmentosa (NARP) is caused by m.8993T&gt;G/C mutations in the mitochondrial adenosine triphosphate synthase subunit 6 gene (MT-ATP6).
In addition, we successfully reduced human mutated mtDNA levels responsible for Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy (LHOND), and neurogenic muscle weakness, ataxia, and retinitis pigmentosa (NARP), in mammalian oocytes using mitochondria-targeted TALEN (mito-TALENs).
Based on our previous findings that ROS level was higher in human osteosarcoma cybrids--Neuropathy, Ataxia and Retinitis Pigmentosa (NARP) and was reduced by selenite treatment, this study was designed to elucidate the effects of selenite administration on oxidative and nitrosative damage to lipids, proteins and DNA.
We report a patient having classical clinical feature of neurologic muscle weakness, ataxia, and retinitis pigmentosa (NARP) and a novel mutation, m.8729 G&gt;A in mitochondria DNA.
His mother, who had previously been diagnosed with cerebral palsy, was concurrently diagnosed with neuropathy, ataxia, and retinitis pigmentosa (NARP) due to heteroplasmy of the same mutation.
In this issue, Gammage and colleagues successfully apply this improved technology on patients' cells with two types of genetic alterations responsible for neuropathy ataxia and retinitis pigmentosa (NARP) syndrome and Kearns Sayre syndrome and progressive external ophthalmoplegia (PEO).
There are several diseases that have a mitochondrial origin such as chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia (CPEO) and the Kearns- Sayre syndrome (KSS), myoclonic epilepsy with ragged-red fibers (MERRF), mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, lactic acidosis and strokelike episodes (MELAS), Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON), the syndrome of neurogenic muscle weakness, ataxia and retinitis pigmentosa (NARP), and Leigh's syndrome.
Neuroblastoma cells treated with free myb-as or nontargeted CCL-myb-as showed the same level of c-myb protein expression as control cells.
Immune cell activation, involving the time-dependent activation of macrophages and NK cells, contributes to the antitumor activity of targeted liposome-CpG-myb-as against neuroblastoma and could improve the effectiveness of antitumor targeted liposomes.
While YY1 is known to exert both positive and negative regulatory influences on nuclear-encoded mitochondrial proteins, as well as on neurodegeneration-related genes, in all cell lines we studied (including neuroblastoma) the effect of YY1 on GDAP1 expression is activatory.
Using the DBH-expressing human neuroblastoma SK-N-BE(2)C and DBH-negative HeLa cell lines as model systems, we report here that this CRE/YY1/AP1 area interacts with multiple nuclear proteins, including CRE-binding protein (CREB) and transcription factor YY1 in a cell-specific manner.
However, little is known about the expression of CD44v6 in Gastric Carcinoma (GC).
Multiple carcinomas including breast, ovarian, colon, lung and stomach cancer, overexpress the hyaluronic acid (HA) receptor, CD44.
Here, we show that the transcription of a long non-coding RNA (lncRNA), Gastric Adenocarcinoma Associated, Positive CD44 Regulator, Long Intergenic Non-Coding RNA (GAPLINC), is directly activated by HIF-1Alfa in gastric cancer (GC).
The expressions of 10 putative cell surface markers of CSCs, as well as aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) activity, were studied, and the tumorigenic properties of cells were evaluated by in vitro tumorsphere assays and in vivo xenografts by limiting dilution assays.Results: We found that a subpopulation of gastric carcinoma cells expressing EPCAM, CD133, CD166, CD44, and a high ALDH activity presented the properties to generate new heterogeneous tumorspheres in vitro and tumors in vivo CD44 and CD166 were coexpressed, representing 6.1% to 37.5% of the cells; ALDH activity was detected in 1.6% to 15.4% of the cells; and the ALDH+ cells represented a core within the CD44+/CD166+ subpopulation that contained the highest frequency of tumorigenic CSCs in vivo The ALDH+ cells possessed drug efflux properties and were more resistant to standard chemotherapy than the ALDH- cells, a process that was partially reversed by verapamil treatment.Conclusions: CD44 and ALDH are the most specific biomarkers to detect and isolate tumorigenic and chemoresistant gastric CSCs in noncardia gastric carcinomas independently of the histologic classification of the tumor.
Clinically, low CD10 expression was consistent with a specific set of ovarian cancer patient samples.
Furthermore, our data indicate that primary stage targeting of CD10-/ALDH- CSCs in specific ovarian cancer patients in future may facilitate targeting of recurrent disease, before it ever develops.
All cases were negative for CD10 and WT-1 ruling out endometrial stromal tumor and were negative for HMB-45 and melan-A ruling out perivascular epithelioid cell tumor (both endometrial stromal tumor and perivascular epithelioid cell tumor have prominent vessels but have different histomorphology).
Immunohistochemistry indicated a phenotypic transition from a uterine leiomyosarcoma to a vaginal epithelioid lesion; marker expression changed from the uterine tumor actin+/desmin+/caldesmon+/CD10- phenotype, through the tumor emboli, to an actin-/desmin-/caldesmon-/CD10+ phenotype in the vaginal lesion.
Immunohistochemistry for IFITM1 and CD10 was performed in 20 cases of smooth muscle neoplasms (10 cases leiomyoma, 10 cases leiomyosarcoma), 14 cases of endometrial stromal sarcoma (ESS) (12 cases of low grade and 2 cases of high grade) and 12 cases of carcinosarcoma.
While both IFITM1 (83%) and CD10 (91%) had high sensitivity in differentiating low-grade ESSs from smooth muscle neoplasms, IFITM1 (70%) had higher specificity compared with CD10 (45%).
In this study IFITM1 appears to be a more specific marker of endometrial stromal differentiation compared with CD10 in differentiating low-grade ESSs from smooth muscle neoplasms.
To further evaluate the nature of the HLA association with alopecia areata (AA), we investigated the HLA-DRB1 locus in 161 AA patients and 165 matched controls from Belgium and Germany.
In the present study, we found that miR-19a expression was significantly upregulated in metastatic clear cell renal carcinoma than that in adjacent and primary carcinoma tissues using qPCR and in situ hybridization experiments.
Thus, we provide evidence demonstrating that downregulation of miR-19a may be therapeutically beneficial for metastatic renal carcinoma.
Taqman probe stem-loop real-time PCR was used to accurately measure the levels of miR-19a in bladder cancer cell lines, 100 pairs of bladder cancer tissues and the adjacent non-neoplastic tissues and also the plasma collected from bladder cancer patients and normal controls.
miR-19a mimics and inhibitors were transfected into bladder cancer cells to investigate its role on regulating cell proliferation which was measured by CCK-8 and colony formation assay.
miR-19a was significantly up-regulated in bladder cancer tissues and high-level of miR-19a was correlative with more aggressive phenotypes of bladder cancer.
Meanwhile, gain or loss of function of miR-19a demonstrated that miR-19a can promote cell growth of bladder cancer cells and the further mechanism studies indicated that its oncogenic role was dependent on targeting PTEN.
Furthermore, investigation of miR-19a expression in the plasma of bladder cancer patients showed that miR-19a was also increased in plasma of bladder cancer patients which strongly supported miR-19a could be developed as potential diagnostic marker of bladder cancer.
Our data indicated that miR-19a might act as an oncogenic microRNA in bladder cancer and was significantly up-regulated in bladder cancer carcinogenesis.
The oncogenic role of miR19a in bladder cancer was dependent on targeting PTEN.
The synergy effect between miRNA-19a and arsenic trioxide that advocates targeting the mir-19a may represent a potential approach to enhance the efficacy and safety of ATO to treat bladder cancer by a decrease in dose.
There was significant decreases in serum albumin and haptoglobin and increases in alpha-1 globulin, ceruloplasmin and alpha-1 globulin, there were no significant differences between schistosomiasis patients and the controls in terms of changes in any laboratory test as a result of the treatment, thus suggesting that patients with active schistosomiasis do not incur a higher risk of hepatic dysfunction while using oral contraception.
Aqueous flare values and the vitreous levels of VEGF, IL-6, MCP-1, sICAM-1, and sVEGFR-2 were compared between previously untreated patients with BRVO and patients with macular hole (MH).
We investigated the relations between the aqueous flare value and vitreous levels of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), soluble intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (sICAM-1), and interleukin-6 (IL-6) in patients with CRVO and macular edema or patients with idiopathic macular hole (MH).
Vitreous fluid levels of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), soluble VEGF receptor 2 (sVEGFR-2), soluble intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (sICAM-1), interleukin 6 (IL-6), monocyte chemotactic protein 1 (MCP-1), and pentraxin 3 (PTX3) were significantly higher in CRVO patients than in macular hole patients.
In 39 patients with BRVO and macular edema and 21 individuals with idiopathic macular hole (MH) serving as controls, vitreous fluid samples were obtained during vitreoretinal surgery, and the levels of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), soluble VEGF receptor 2 (sVEGFR-2), soluble intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (sICAM-1), interleukin 6 (IL-6), monocyte chemotactic protein 1 (MCP-1), pentraxin 3 (PTX3), and pigment epithelium-derived factor (PEDF) were measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.
To investigate relationships among vitreous fluid levels of soluble vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-2 (sVEGFR-2), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), and soluble intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (sICAM-1) in patients with branch retinal vein occlusion (BRVO) and macular edema or patients with idiopathic macular hole.
BRVO patients had a significantly higher vitreous fluid level of sVEGFR-2 (median, 1670 pg/mL; interquartile range [IQL], 1205 to 2225 pg/mL) than macular hole patients (median, 1265 pg/mL; IQR, 731 to 1800 pg/mL; P = .017), as was the case for VEGF (median, 237 pg/mL; IQR, 42.2 to 1305 pg/mL; vs median, 15.6 pg/mL; IQR, 15.6 to 15.6 pg/mL; P &lt; .001) and sICAM-1 (median, 10.1 ng/mL; IQR, 6.3 to 22.5 ng/mL; vs median, 4.1 ng/mL; IQR, 3.3 to 6.0 ng/mL; P &lt; .001).
Vitreous levels of sICAM-1 were significantly increased in vitreous specimens from both PVR (median +/- SD; 12.0 +/- 76.3 ng/ml; P &lt; 0.01) and PDR (8.4 +/- 24.0 ng/ml; P &lt; 0.01) when compared to vitreous from eyes with macular holes (0.
Levels of sICAM-1 in this group were compared with those in vitreous from 31 eyes with RRD without clinical risk factors for PVR, 32 eyes with established PVR and 10 eyes with macular holes.
Vitreous sICAM-1 levels in eyes with RRD at high risk of developing PVR were significantly lower than in eyes with established PVR (p=0.037), but higher than in eyes with macular holes (p &lt;0.0001).
Rare pathogenic alleles with high penetrance and associated haplotypes at 10 loci (CFTR, FAH, HBB, HEXA, LDLR, LPL, PAH, PABP2, PDDR, and SACS) are expressed in probands with cystic fibrosis, tyrosinemia, beta-thalassemia, Tay-Sachs, familial hypercholesterolemia, hyperchylomicronemia, PKU, oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy, pseudo vitamin D deficiency rickets, and spastic ataxia of Charlevoix-Saguenay, respectively) reveal the interpopulation and intrapopulation genetic diversity of Quebec.
Biochemical, neuropathological, and genetic evidence suggests an important role for TCERG1 in Huntington's disease (HD) pathogenesis.
Further investigations on the underlying mechanisms showed that the depletion of dG9a repressed starvation-induced autophagy by controlling the expression level of Atg8a, a critical gene for the progression of autophagy, in a different manner to that in cancer cells.
Bioinformatic analysis of human tumours revealed that several core autophagy genes, including GABARAP, correlate with oncogenic KRAS mutations and poor prognosis in human pancreatic cancer, supporting a potential tumour-suppressive effect of the pathway in Ras-driven human cancers.
Using a yeast two-hybrid screening approach, based on a thyroid cancer patients library, we showed that CDH6 directly interacts with GABARAP, BNIP3 and BNIP3L, and that through these interactions CDH6 restrains autophagy and promotes re-organization of mitochondrial network through a DRP1-mediated mechanism.
We previously reported that GABARAPL1 expression was frequently downregulated in cancer cells while a high GABARAPL1 expression is a good prognosis marker for patients with lymph node-positive breast cancer.
In this study, we asked using qRT-PCR, western blotting and epigenetic quantification whether the expression of the GABARAP family was regulated in breast cancer by epigenetic modifications.
Our data demonstrated that a specific decrease of GABARAPL1 expression in breast cancers was associated with both DNA methylation and histone deacetylation and that CREB-1 recruitment on GABARAPL1 promoter was required for GABARAPL1 expression.
Here we demonstrate that runx1 deletion in mice induces the persistence of MYH10 in platelets, and a similar persistence was observed in platelets of patients with constitutional (familial platelet disorder/acute myeloid leukemia) or acquired (chronic myelomonocytic leukemia) RUNX1 mutations.
MYH10 was also detected in platelets of patients with the Paris-Trousseau syndrome, a thrombocytopenia related to the deletion of the transcription factor FLI1 that forms a complex with RUNX1 to regulate megakaryopoiesis, whereas MYH10 persistence was not observed in other inherited forms of thrombocytopenia.
We propose MYH10 detection as a new and simple tool to identify inherited platelet disorders and myeloid neoplasms with abnormalities in RUNX1 and its associated proteins.
The existence of gynecomastia, age, detection of heterogeneous nodules on ultrasound, and preoperative alpha-fetoprotein and beta HCG are relevant data in relation to histological type of tumor.
List of Abbreviations: AO: Acridine orange, AIDS: Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, ACT: Artemisinin-based combination therapy, CM:Cerebral malaria, BCP:Benzothiocarboxypurine, DDT:Dichloro-diphenyl-trichloroethane, DNA:DeoxyriboNucleic Acid, ELAM-1: Endothelial leukocyte adhesion molecule, G6PD: Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase, HIV: Human immuno deficiency virus, HRP 2: Histidine Rich Protein 2, ICAM -1: Inter cellular adhesion molecule1, ICER: Incremental cost effectiveness ratio, IL-1: Interleukin -1, IFN-g: Interferon-gamma, IgG: Immunoglobulin G, MP: Malaria parasite, NADP: Oxidised Nicotinamide Adenine Dinucleotide Phosphate, NADPH: Reduced Nicotinamide Adenine Dinucleotide Phosphate, PCV: Packed Cell Volume (haematocrit), P. falciparum: Plasmodium falciparum, PLDH: Plasmodium lactate dehydrogenase, PCR: Polymerase Chain Reaction, PPV: Positive predictive value, QBC: Quantitative Buffy Coat examination, TNF: Tumour necrosis factor, NPV: Negative predictive value, RDT: Rapid diagnostic test, SP: Sulphadoxine -Pyrimethamine, SMA: Severe malarial anaemia, UM: Uncomplicated malaria, USA:United States of America, VCAM-1: Vascular cell adhesion molecule, WBC: White Blood Cell, WHO: World Health Organization.
HS intake increased natriuresis, diuresis, and urinary DA while it decreased cortical NOS I expression (P &lt; 0.05 vs. NS), Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate diaphorase (NADPH-d) activity in MD (P &lt; 0.001 vs. NS) and cortical nitrates+nitrites (NOx) production (NS 2.04 +/- 0.22 vs. HS 1.28 +/- 0.10 nmol mg protein-1, P &lt; 0.01).
Decreased G6PD activity and, as a result, decreased NADPH level have been associated with diabetic kidney disease, altered nitric oxide production, aldosterone-mediated endothelial dysfunction, and dialysis-associated anemia.
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency is the most common enzymatic disorder of red blood cells in human subjects, causing hemolytic anemia linked to impaired nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) production and imbalanced redox homeostasis in erythrocytes.
Interestingly, D2 recovery was accompanied by improvements in photosynthetic parameters (Asat and Fv/Fm) and the NADPH/NADP(+) ratio.
HFD significantly enhanced the Asm activity, ceramide production, colocalization of Nlrp3 (Nod-like receptor protein 3) with ASC (apoptosis-associated speck-like protein) or Caspase-1, NADPH-dependent superoxide (O2(*-)) production in glomeruli of Asm(+/+) mice than in control diet-fed mice.
We have studied the effects of growth factors and cytokines on the tumorigenicity and invasion capacity of tumor cells by using regressor and progressor tumor cell lines (ER-1 and ERpP, respectively) derived from an SHR rat mammary adenocarcinoma.
We have studied the effect of growth factors and cytokine on tumorigenesis and invasive capacity of tumor cells by examining a regressor tumor cell line (ER-1) derived from SHR rat mammary adenocarcinoma.
Level of several proteins including haptoglobin, transthyretin, osteopontin, vitronectin, complement factor H and different classes of immunoglobulins are found to be considerably increased in CSF of higher grades of gliomas.
Vitronectin is an extracellular matrix protein, the synthesis of which by glioma cells correlates with tumor grade.
The current study was designed to investigate the relationship between serum vitronectin levels and clinicopathological characteristics, diagnosis and prognosis in glioma patients.
Serum vitronectin levels were significantly elevated in glioma patients as compared with other groups.
Serum vitronectin levels could significantly distinguish glioma patients from other groups and discriminate high-grade glioma from low-grade glioma.
Serum vitronectin may be a promising diagnostic and prognostic biomarker that can be detected in the peripheral blood of patients with glioma.
Bioinformatics analysis emphasized key roles of integrin Beta3, hypoxia and vitronectin and their strong correlations with EGFRvIII expression in malignant glioma patient samples in vivo.
In conclusion, we demonstrate that EGFRvIII/integrin Beta3 complexes promote GBM progression and metastasis in the environment of hypoxia and vitronectin-enrichment, and cilengitide may serve as a promising therapeutics for EGFRvIII-positive GBMs.
Glioma cells derived from the brain of the (12) V-Ha-Ras transgenic mice were used to study the effect of PI-3 kinase inhibitor SF1126 on activation of AKT and ERK signaling, proliferation, vitronectin mediated migration and changes in the distribution of cortical actin on vitronectin in the glioma cells in vitro.
Most notably, treatment of SF1126 blocked integrin-dependent migration in transwell and scratch assays and caused a significant change in the organization and distribution of cortical actin on vitronectin in the glioma cells.
The hit compound 5.3d inhibited invasion and migration of both GBM stem cells (Gli7 and Gli4) and GBM cancer cell lines (C6, SNB75) on fibronectin, vitronectin, and laminin.
In this study, efficient downregulation of cathepsin B and uPAR by siRNA treatments significantly reduced glioma cell adhesion to laminin as compared to vitronectin, fibronectin, or collagen I in U251 and 4910 glioma cell lines.
Necl-5, a cell surface receptor for vitronectin, is expressed in GBM but not normal brain.
These included sudden appearance of tender, erythematous nodular eruptions mimicking ENL, severe constitutional symptoms like high grade fever, malaise, vomiting, epistaxis, joint pain and tenosynovitis simulating Type 2 Lepra Reaction.
OGR1 and TRPC4 are prominently expressed in healthy cerebellar tissue throughout postnatal development and in primary cerebellar medulloblastoma tissues.
Our results suggest that OGR1 enhances expression of TRPC4-containing channels that contribute to enhanced invasion and metastasis of granule precursor-derived human medulloblastoma.
Here, we report that OGR1 and G2A are expressed in human medulloblastoma tissue and its corresponding neuronal cell line.
Two daughters of an affected mother demonstrated symptoms of stage III ADNIV, with posterior uveitis, cystoid macular edema, intraocular fibrosis, retinal neovascularization, retinal degeneration, and cataract.
Visual acuity and features of ADNIV, including inflammatory cells, neovascularization, fibrosis, and cystoid macular edema, were reviewed.
Autosomal dominant neovascular inflammatory vitreoretinopathy (ADNIV) is an inherited eye disease characterized by retinal and iris neovascularization, abnormal retinal pigmentation, anterior chamber and vitreous inflammation, cystoid macular edema, vitreous hemorrhage, and traction retinal detachment.
Common metabolic problems in northeastern Thailand include renal stone disease, distal renal tubular acidosis, hypokalemic periodic paralysis, sudden unexplained nocturnal death and malnutrition-related diabetes mellitus.
High prevalence of CD in presence of anemia and short stature in seropositive FDR in index study indicates need of targeted screening of this subgroup for the presence of CD.CD is unlikely in the absence of HLADQ2/DQ8.
The concurrence of the intracranial multiple primary tumors (MPTs) consisting of acoustic neuroma (AN) and pituitary adenoma is very rare.
Thirty five cases of MPTs were subdivided into three subtypes, i.e., 1) main duct type, 2) branch duct type and 3) peripheral type (mucinous cystadenoma/cystadenocarcinoma).
Together, these data suggest that IL11 could trigger an ER stress response in the placenta, which may contribute to obstetric complications such as preeclampsia.
The relationship between IL-11 and CLS has rarely been reported, especially in patients with colorectal cancer.
Although rare, CLS could be a severe side effect after the administration of IL-11.
We describe four cases of the patients with ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) that were treated with interleukin-11 (IL-11), a cardioprotective cytokine.
The protective role of IL-11, an IL-6 family cytokine, has been implicated in ischemia/reperfusion injury (IRI) in the heart and kidney, but its role has not been elucidated in liver IRI.
Next, IL-11 was injected intraperitoneally (ip) 1 hour before ischemia.
Pertussis toxin gene (ptxA-Pr), insertion sequence genes (IS481 and IS1001), adenylate cyclase genes and structural porin and flagellin genes were chosen as targets for PCR, in different studies.
PCR assays targeting insertion sequence IS481 (IS), pertussis toxin ptxA promoter region (PT), and outer membrane porin (PO), or recA (RA) were evaluated in respiratory specimens collected from 4,442 patients with suspected pertussis.
In this study, we evaluated the role of miR-135b in colorectal cancer (CRC) and its regulatory role for metastasis suppressor-1 (MTSS1) and its mechanisms.
The levels of miR-135b and MTSS1 gene expression in 35 CRC and corresponding cancer-adjacent tissues, 27 colorectal adenoma, and 16 normal tissue samples were quantified using qRT-PCR and western blot analysis.
Jahid and colleagues have shown that miR-23a promotes the transition from indolent to invasive colorectal cancer through inhibition of the MTSS1 tumor suppressor.
To investigate the expression of miR-23a and metastasis suppressor 1 (MTSS1) and their clinical significance in colon carcinoma.
The expression rates of miR-23a and MTSS1 were 87.0% (80/92) and 17.4% (16/92) in colon carcinoma cases, respectively (P &lt; 0.01).
Both the low expression of MTSS1 and high expression of miR-23a may serve as important biological markers for the malignant phenotypes of colon cancer, such as invasion and metastasis.
The aims of this study were to investigate metastasis suppressor 1 (MTSS1) expression in benign and malignant colorectal tissues and to explore its significance in the prognosis of colorectal cancer (CRC) patients.
MTSS1 expression was detected by immunohistochemistry in CRC, colorectal adenomatous polyp (precancerous lesion) and normal colorectal tissues.
These genes (CACNA1C, COL2A1, CPNE8, C3F, C12ORF4, DDX11, GDF11, HOXC8, KCNA1, MDS028, TMEM106C, NR4A1, PHB2, PRICKLE1, Q6ZUQ4, SCN8A, TUBA8 and USP18) are located on porcine chromosome 5 (SSC5) and represent positional and functional candidates for arthrogryposis multiplex congenita (AMC), which maps to SSC5.
In this study, we tested whether this tolerance is intact in systemic lupus erythematosus-prone (New Zealand Black x SWR)F1 mice (SNF1).
The F1 cross between SWR and NZB mice, SNF1, develops severe immune complex glomerulonephritis, in a similar manner to humans with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).
Exposure to bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)-4 was found to enhance a TrkAhigh/CD15-/CD184- neuroblastoma cellular subset, accompanied by a reduction in doublecortin-positive neuroblasts and of NMYC protein expression in SH-SY5Y cells.
In cell-based assays, it is demonstrated that PST3.1a alters the Beta1,6-GlcNAc N-glycans of GBM-initiating cells (GIC) by inhibiting MGAT5 enzymatic activity, resulting in the inhibition of TGFBetaR and FAK signaling associated with doublecortin (DCX) upregulation and increase oligodendrocyte lineage transcription factor 2 (OLIG2) expression.
To assess the expression of Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR-3) and TLR-7 in muscle tissue from patients with polymyositis (PM) and dermatomyositis (DM) and to investigate the function and regulation of TLR-3 in cultured muscle cells.
We analyzed the coding sequences and exon-intron boundaries of GLIALCAM, encoding an IgG-like cell adhesion protein, in 81 individuals with Autism Spectrum Disorders, either with or without comorbid epilepsy, paroxysmal EEG and/or macrocephaly, and the PTEN gene in the subsample with macrocephaly.
Whilst we detected in GLIALCAM several single nucleotide variants without clear pathogenic effects, we found a novel PTEN heterozygous frameshift mutation in one case with "extreme" macrocephaly, autism, intellectual disability and seizures.
In other families with dominant HEPACAM mutations, patients had macrocephaly and mental retardation with or without autism.
Dominant HEPACAM mutations can cause either macrocephaly and mental retardation with or without autism or benign familial macrocephaly.
B AaHHoe NccneAoBaHNe BownN 59 AeTeN c ANcoyHKmyNeN wyHTNpyhweN cNcTeMbl B Bo3pacTe oT 1 roAa Ao 14 neT, npoxoANBwNx ne4eHNe B OeAepanbHoM myeHTpe HeNpoxNpyprNN (HoBocNbNpcK) c 2014 no 2016 r. KpNTepNN BKnh4eHNR B NccneAoBaHNe: 1) Bo3pacT Ha MoMeHT obcneAoBaHNR cTapwe 1 roAa; 2) NMnnaHTamyNR wyHTNpyhweN cNcTeMbl B nepBble 12 Mec XN3HN.
Thus, myocyte autonomous inhibition of PKCalpha protects the adult heart from decompensation and dilated cardiomyopathy after infarction injury in association with a primary enhancement in contractility.
Hypercontractility caused by Prkca deletion protects against heart failure induced by pressure overload, and against dilated cardiomyopathy induced by deleting the gene encoding muscle LIM protein (Csrp3).
Deletion of Prkca also rescues cardiomyopathy associated with overexpression of PP-1.
PD-L1 staining was detected in 80% of anaplastic large cell lymphoma, angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma and follicular dendritic cell sarcoma, 75% of nodular lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin lymphoma, 53% of primary mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma, 39% of extranodal NK/T cell lymphoma, 26% of peripheral T-cell lymphoma, 10% of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and very rare examples of mantle, marginal zone and small lymphocytic lymphomas.
PD-L1 also showed stronger expression in ALK+ ALCL compared with ALK- ALCL, suggesting an additional role of C/EBPBeta in ALK+ ALCL in generating an immunosuppressive environment.
In conclusion, surface antigen expression profiling demonstrates that C/EBPBeta plays a critical role in the activation state of ALK+ ALCL cells and reveals CD147 and PD-L1 as important downstream targets.
Also, the neoplastic cells of classical Hodgkin lymphoma, anaplastic large cell lymphoma, schwannoma, thymoma, and squamous cell carcinoma of various sites frequently expressed PD-L1.
These unique features, which are strictly dependent on NPM-ALK activity and expression, include perpetual cell growth, proliferation, and survival; activation of the key signal transduction pathways STAT3 and mTORC1; and expression of CD30 (the hallmark of anaplastic large-cell lymphoma) and of immunosuppressive cytokine IL-10 and cell-surface protein PD-L1/CD274.
PD-L1 was expressed uniformly by anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL) cell lines, but rarely in B-cell NHL, confined to a subset of diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (DLBCL) with activated B-cell features (3 of 28 cell lines and 24% of primary DLBCL).
Anti-PD-L1 blocking antibody boosted proliferation and IFN-Gamma secretion by allogeneic T cells responding to ALCL and DLBCL cells.
In autologous cultures of primary ALCL and DLBCL, PD-L1 blockade enhanced secretion of inflammatory cytokines IFN-Gamma, granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor, interleukin (IL)-1, IL-6, IL-8, IL-13, TNF-Alfa, and macrophage inflammatory protein-1Alfa.
We examined B7-H1 expression in anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL) and Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) and found that it was constitutively expressed in both clinical samples and cell lines.
In anaplastic lymphoma kinase-positive (ALK(+)) ALCL cells, B7-H1 expression was suppressed by the blocking of extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) signaling and upregulated by the augmentation of ERK activity by phorbol 13-myristate 12-acetate stimulation, suggesting that B7-H1 expression is regulated by ERK signaling pathway in ALCL.
ERK is one of the downstream mediators of nucleophosmin (NPM)/ALK signaling in ALK(+)ALCL, and pharmacological inhibition of ALK was shown to dephosphorylate ERK and down-regulate B7-H1.
The involvement of NPM/ALK in B7-H1 expression was also demonstrated by introducing the construct into human non-ALCL lymphoid cell lines, which resulted in B7-H1 expression.
These results suggest that B7-H1 expression is controlled by common ERK signaling pathways in ALCL and HL cells.
The applicability of clinical genetics in nephrology is due to the fact that many kidney diseases are characterized by genetic mutations (e.g., von-Hippel Lindau syndrome, MYH9 related disorders, Fabry's syndrome, Liddle's and Bartter's Syndrome, and others).
In this study, we tested the hypothesis that a common single nucleotide polymorphism rs16996677 in the MYH9 gene may contribute to the etiology of DN in type 2 diabetes (T2D) in a Taiwanese population with T2D.
It has been demonstrated that Wnt signaling through the secretion of Wnt inhibitors, such as DKK1, sFRP-2, and sFRP-3, plays a key role in the decreased osteoblast activity associated with multiple myeloma (MM) bone disease.
The authors studied the methylation status of CDKN2A, CDKN2B, XAF1, CDH13, JUNB and a panel of soluble Wnt inhibitors including WIF1, DKK3, APC, SFRP1, SFRP2, SFRP4 and SFRP5 by methylation-specific PCR in 31 bone marrow and 21 peripheral blood samples of patients with essential thrombocythaemia.
We studied the activity of Wnt signaling and the methylation status of WIF1, DKK3, APC, SFRP1, SFRP2, SFRP4 and SFRP5 by methylation-specific PCR in myeloma cell lines and primary myeloma samples.
On the other hand, myeloma cells suppress osteoblast function by the secretion of osteoblast inhibiting factors, e.g., the Wnt inhibitors DKK-1 and sFRP-2.
Hedgehog signaling is frequently activated in esophageal cancer, gastric cancer and pancreatic cancer due to transcriptional upregulation of Hedgehog ligands and epigenetic silencing of HHIP1/HHIP gene, encoding the Hedgehog inhibitor.
Sel-1-like (SEL1L) is a putative tumor suppressor gene that is significantly downregulated in human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA).
SEL1L is a putative tumor suppressor gene that is frequently down-regulated in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA).
Using a functional genomic approach, we identified a seven-gene panel (TNC, TFPI, TGFBI, SEL-1L, L1CAM, WWTR1, and CDC42BPA) that was differentially expressed across three different expression platforms, including pancreatic tumor/normal samples.
Previously, it was reported that SEL1L is able to decrease the aggressive behavior of human pancreatic tumor cells both in vitro and in vivo.
To gain insights into the involvement of SEL1L in tumor invasion, we performed gene expression analysis on the pancreatic cancer cell line Suit-2 subjected to two complementary strategies: upregulation and downregulation of SEL1L expression by stable transfection of the entire cDNA under an inducible promoter and by RNA-mediated interference.
The gene SEL1L is involved both in human breast and pancreatic cancer progression.
Recent data suggest that SEL1L may play an important role in pancreatic carcinoma, similar to breast cancer, where the expression of SEL1L has been associated with a reduction in both proliferative activity in vitro and clinical tumor aggressiveness.
To investigate this possibility, we examined the expression of Sel1L in a series of primary pancreatic carcinomas by immunohistochemistry and characterized the effects of Sel1L overexpression both in vitro and in vivo.
In 74 pancreatic cancers analysed, 36% lacked Sel1L expression, although there was no significant correlation between the expression of Sel1L and any clinicopathologic parameter, including survival.
Overexpression of SEL1L in stably transfected pancreatic cancer cells caused both a decrease in clonogenicity and anchorage-independent growth as well as a significant increase in the levels of activin A and SMAD4.
Thus, it can be hypothesized that Sel1L plays an important function in the growth and aggressiveness of pancreatic carcinoma.
Levels of angiogenic markers bFGF, angiogenin and VEGF in EBC significantly discriminated between 17 individuals with newly detected NSCLC versus stable and exacerbated chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients as well as healthy volunteers.
Hereditary amyloidosis of the Finnish type (HAF, or familial amyloid polyneuropathy type IV) is an autosomal dominant disease that has been described most commonly in the Finnish population but has also been found in some other countries.
Plasma fibrinogen, FII, FV, FVII, FVIII, FIX, FX, FXI and FXII activity levels and C4BP concentrations were determined in 73 patients with non-metastatic colorectal cancer (48 colon and 25 rectum) and in 67 matched control subjects.
Mean plasma concentrations of fibrinogen (functional and antigen), FVIII, FIX, FV and C4BP were significantly higher in colorectal cancer patients than in control subjects, while FVII and FXII levels were significantly decreased.
In colorectal cancer patients high plasma fibrinogen, FVIII and FIX levels might represent further risk factors for venous thrombotic complications in the immediate post-surgery period, while decreased FVII and FXII concentrations may be an index of intravascular coagulation activation, still in a subclinical phase.
Complications of PPROM include prematurity, chorioamnionitis, neonatal sepsis, limb position defects, respiratory distress syndrome, pulmonary hypoplasia chronic lung disease, periventricular leukomalacia and intraventricular haemorrhage.A number of different sealing techniques have been employed which aim to restore a physical barrier against infection and encourage the re-accumulation of amniotic fluid.
NL infants were unexposed to PPROM or maternal hypertension, had highest requirement for surfactant, did not develop IVH and periventricular leukomalacia (PVL) and none of them were Caucasian.
Molecular analysis indicated that the livers of BDNF mutants fed HFD contained elevated levels of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha (Pparalpha or Ppara as listed in the MGI Database) and fibroblast growth factor 21 (Fgf21) transcripts compared with WTs.
We measured the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and plasma concentrations of interleukin (IL)-1Alfa, IL-1Beta, IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, IL-10, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-Alfa, TNF-Beta, interferon (IFN)-Gamma, the IL-1 receptor antagonist, and soluble IL-4 receptor (sIL-4r) by ELISA in 12 patients each with acute, monosymptomatic, idiopathic optic neuritis (ON), ON as part of MS, other attack forms of MS, and in neurological control subjects.
We have reported previously that ocular infection of different strains of mice with recombinant herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) constitutively expressing interleukin-2 (IL-2) provokes central nervous system (CNS) demyelination and optic neuropathy, as determined by changes in visual evoked cortical potentials and pathological changes in the optic nerve and CNS, whereas recombinant viruses expressing IL-4, gamma interferon, IL-12p35, IL-12p40, or IL-12p70 do not induce this neuropathy.
The objective of this study was to detect interleukin-17 (IL-17), interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma), interleukin-4 (IL-4) and forkhead/winged helix transcription factor p3 (Foxp3) protein and gene expression of the optic nerve and to further explore the role of T helper cell subsets such as Th1, Th2, Th17 and Treg in the pathogenesis of optic neuritis in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE).
In MS and optic neuritis, IL-4 mRNA expressing cells predominated, followed by TGF-beta- and IFN-gamma-positive cells.
GKN1, GKN2, and the trefoil factors TFF1 and TFF3 were examined in tissue microarrays from 155 distal gastric adenocarcinomas.
Loss of GKN1 and GKN2 expression occurs frequently in gastric adenocarcinomas, especially in the diffuse subtype.
Since RIs significantly correlate with renal function, they have been proposed to be independent risk factors for CKD progression, besides proteinuria, low GFR and arterial hypertension.
High uterine artery Doppler resistance indexes (RIs) are predictive of placental complications of pregnancy, such as preeclampsia, fetal growth restriction, and stillbirth.
Patients with hypertension or diabetes mellitus showed higher RIs (p &lt; 0.05) than those without the ailments.
Myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and myeloproliferative disorders are rare in children; they are divided into low-grade MDS (refractory cytopenia of childhood [RCC]), advanced MDS (refractory anemia with excess blasts in transformation), and juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML), each with different characteristics and management strategies.
Thus, genetic ablation or pharmacologic inhibition of Shp2 suppresses the leukemogenic effect of Pten loss, yet simultaneously induces severe anemia in mice with Pten deficiency in blood cells.
Surprisingly, the Shp2 and Pten double-knockout mice suffered lethal anemia, a phenotype that reveals previously unappreciated cooperative roles of Pten and Shp2 in erythropoiesis.
Consistently, treatment of Pten-deficient mice with a specific Shp2 inhibitor suppressed myeloproliferative neoplasm while causing anemia.
Infants with non-metabolic disorders (n = 34); 10 (three neuroblastoma [NBL], three brain tumor, two acute meylogenous leukemia [AML], one rhabdomyosarcoma, and one retinoblastoma) received auto HSCT, and 24 (eight hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis [HLH], four juvenile meylomonocytic leukemia [JMML], four Wiscott-Aldrych Syndrome [WAS], three acute lymphoblastic leukemia [ALL], two AML, one severe aplastic anemia [SAA], one chronic granulomatous disease [CGD], and one amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia) received allo HSCT.
The human choroideremia-like (CHML) gene and a locus for Usher syndrome type 2 (USH2) were recently mapped to the 1q31-qter region employing physical mapping and genetic linkage studies, respectively.
To investigate a possible role of the CHML gene in the pathogenesis of USH2, we investigated 10 Dutch and 9 Danish USH2 patients for point mutations in the open reading frame of the CHML gene.
These results suggest that CHML is not involved in the pathogenesis of USH2.
We hypothesized that the Hrad17 may be expressed in thymoma, especially in invasive thymoma.
We attempted to determine the influence of Hrad17 expression on clinicopathological features for patients with thymoma who had undergone surgery.
Expression of Hrad17 messenger ribonucleic acid (RNA) was evaluated by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction using a LightCycler in 38 thymomas and 10 adjacent histologically normal thymus samples from patients for whom follow-up data was available.
No relationship was seen between Hrad17 gene expression and age, gender, or pathological thymoma subtypes.
Hrad17 mRNA expression in invasive thymomas (stage II-IV, 10.067 +/- 5.293) was significantly higher than that in stage I thymomas (5.193 +/- 4.485, p = 0.0168).
Immunohistochemistry showed that Hrad17 protein was highly expressed in invasive thymoma tumor tissue but not within the normal thymus tissue.
Hrad17 was highly expressed in invasive thymoma.
In induced apical periodontitis, osteoblastic expression of SIRT6 was significantly suppressed (P = 0.001) which was associated with significantly elevated levels of LDHA (P = 0.003) and 8-OHdG (P = 0.004) and significantly enhanced recruitment of macrophages (P = 0.004).
The main objective of this work was to evaluate a new therapeutic strategy against a colitis-related colorectal cancer in vivo and in vitro by targeting mTOR-signaling and lactate dehydrogenase A.
There were striking laboratory abnormalities in the groups diagnosed with toxic hepatitis (mean peak values: AST 775 +/- 464 U/L, ALT 400 +/- 447 U/L, ALP 767 +/- 408 U/L, LDH 1,469 +/- 779 U/L).
To determine Lactate Dehydrogenase Activity (LDHA) in whole saliva in individuals with periodontal disease and the effect of ultrasonic scaling on this enzyme activity.
LDH-1 activity was detected to be significantly higher in the sterile cirrhotic ascites when compared with spontaneous bacterial peritonitis, malignant ascites, tuberculous ascites and congestive heart failure-related ascites.
Hirudin variants (HV1 and HV2) were produced in infected insect cells as secreted proteins by joining their coding sequences to the leader peptide sequence of the vescicular stomatitis virus G protein.
Macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) is a proinflammatory cytokine involved in systemic, autoimmune, and inflammatory diseases, such as obesity, rheumatoid arthritis, and systemic lupus erythematosus.
To systematically review evidence regarding the relationship between circulating macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) levels and rheumatoid arthritis (RA), and the association between MIF gene polymorphisms and RA susceptibility.
To investigate the role of macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) in the pathogenesis of ankylosing spondylitis (AS).
Rheumatoid SAAT secreted more adiponectin and macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) than respective osteoarthritis tissue.
Macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) has emerged as a promising drug target in diseases including sepsis, rheumatoid arthritis, and cancer.
Macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), as crucial parameters of angiogenesis and inflammation, were evaluated to identify the role of cyclic citrullinated peptide antibodies (anti-CCP) during angiogenesis in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and psoriatic arthritis (PsA).
The aim of this study was to search for any difference between the serum levels of OPG, FGF-23, and vitamin D in patients with hypogonadism and the healthy controls.
These include FGF3 in Michel aplasia; FGF8 in cleft lip/palate and in hypogonadotropic hypogonadism; FGF9 in carcinoma; FGF10 in the lacrimal/salivary glands aplasia, and lacrimo-auriculo-dento-digital syndrome; FGF14 in spinocerebellar ataxia; FGF20 in Parkinson disease; and FGF23 in tumoral calcinosis and hypophosphatemic rickets.
Recent studies using genetically modified mice, such as FGF23-/- and Klotho-/- mice that exhibit altered mineral homeostasis due to a high vitamin D activity showed features of premature aging that include retarded growth, osteoporosis, atherosclerosis, ectopic calcification, immunological deficiency, skin and general organ atrophy, hypogonadism and short lifespan.
Moreover, Fgf23(-/-)/klotho(-/-) mice show soft tissue and vascular calcification, severe muscle wasting, hypogonadism, pulmonary emphysema, distention of intestinal wall, and skin atrophy, all of which are also seen in Fgf23(-/-) and klotho(-/-) mice.
Recent studies using genetically altered mouse models, such as in Fgf-23(-/-) and klotho mutant mice, that exhibit altered mineral ion metabolism due to high vitamin D activities showed features of premature aging that include atherosclerosis, emphysema, osteopenia/osteoporosis, hypogonadism, soft tissue calcifications and generalized atrophy of organs; the pathologic effects of vitamin D in these mouse models are obvious, as diminution or genetic ablation of the vitamin D pathway ameliorated most of the above-mentioned phenotypes, by reversing mineral ion metabolism, and the resultant effect being prolonged survival of the mutant mice.
Clinical, cytogenetic and molecular features of acute myeloid leukemia with a MLL-SEPT5 fusion gene are reviewed.
The MLL-LCX fusion protein lacked a CXXC domain of LCX, but retained an alpha-helical coiled-coil region at the COOH terminus, similar to MLL-SEPTING, MLL-CDCREL1, MLL-AF1p/Eps15, and MLL-AF6, which suggests that these fusion proteins are involved in the pathogenesis of 11q23-associated leukemia through similar mechanisms.
We also investigated TG101348 activity against feeder cells and observed that STAT5 phosphorylation, granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor, and interleukin 6 levels decreased, indicating reduced cytokine production in HS-5 cells treated with TG101348.
In the present study, we examined the impact of cytoplasmic/mitochondrial localization of p33ING1b in oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) patient samples and explored the therapeutic potential of adenovirally-overexpressed p33ING1b in OSCC cell lines in combination with ionizing radiation (IR) treatment.
In contrast with previous reports, we found that p33ING1b protein and mRNA levels are higher in OSCC compared to normal epithelial cells.
In OSCC patient samples, higher levels of intra-tumoral cytoplasmic p33ING1b correlated with increased apoptotic markers and significantly better patient survival.
IR treatment induced p33ING1b translocation to the mitochondria and adenoviral-p33ING1b synergized with IR to kill OSCC cells.
Our results identify a novel functional relationship between cytoplasmic p33ING1b and patient survival and highlight the potential for the use of p33ING1b as a therapeutic agent in combination with adjuvant radiotherapy in OSCC.
Since loss of heterozygosity at 13q34 has been reported in squamous cell carcinoma of head and neck, we screened for mutations in ING1 by polymerase chain reaction-single strand conformation polymorphism in 71 oral squamous cell carcinomas (OSCC) from India, 15 of which were known to harbor p53 mutations.
These results suggest that ING1 is not a target for mutational inactivation in OSCC of Indians.
The incidence of human T cell lymphotropic virus type 1 (HLTV-1)-associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis (HAM/TSP) is not well defined in the literature.
Following adult T cell leukemia/lymphoma and HLTV-1-associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis, HTLV-1 uveitis (HU) has been established as a distinct clinical entity caused by HTLV-1 based on seroepidemiological, clinical, and virological studies.
This is a study of the early identification of a new case of tropical spastic paraparesis/HLTV-1-associated myelopathy in a Spanish patient not previously reported on.
Myxoid liposarcoma (MLS) is a soft tissue sarcoma characterized by a recurrent t(12;16) translocation.
Although myxoid liposarcomas (MLS) are the most common type of soft-tissue sarcomas in adults, their primary location in the superficial tissues is rare.
PRG4 is one of the downstream molecules of the myxoid liposarcoma (MLS)-specific fusion oncoproteins TLS-CHOP and EWS-CHOP.
The SUV max values of the low-grade thymomas, high-grade thymomas, TCs and MLs were 3.14 +/- 0.73, 4.34 +/- 1.49, 8.59 +/- 3.05, and 10.08 +/- 2.53, respectively, with significant differences between the low- and high-grade thymomas, and between TCs and MLs.
Of 24 patients with actionable mutations, five were given genotype-matched drugs corresponding to actionable mutations: everolimus to PIK3CA mutation in parotid carcinosarcoma (partial response) and tracheal squamous cell carcinoma (stable disease; 21% reduction), sorafenib to PDGFRA mutation in auditory canal adenocarcinoma (partial response), sorafenib to BRAF mutation in microcytic adnexal carcinoma (progressive disease), and afatinib to ERBB2 mutation in esophageal adenocarcinoma (progressive disease).
The objective of this study was to determine the efficacy of neratinib in the treatment of HER2 amplified carcinosarcoma.
The efficacy of neratinib in the treatment of HER2 amplified carcinosarcoma was determined in vitro using seven primary carcinosarcoma cell lines with differential expression of HER2/neu.
The efficacy of neratinib was determined in treating mice harboring HER2 amplified carcinosarcoma xenografts.
Two of seven (28.5%) carcinosarcoma cell lines were HER2/neu amplified.
HER2/neu amplified cell lines SARARK6 and SARARK9 were significantly more sensitive to neratinib than the five non-HER2/neu amplified carcinosarcoma cell lines (mean+/-SEM IC50:0.014myM+/-0.004vs.0.164myM+/-0.019 p=0.0003).
Neratinib inhibited tumor growth (p=0.012) and prolonged survival in mice harboring HER2 amplified carcinosarcoma xenografts (p=0.0039).
Neratinib inhibits HER2 amplified carcinosarcoma proliferation, signaling, cell cycle progression and tumor growth in vitro.
Numerous correlative scientific investigations have demonstrated that the HER2 (ERBB2) gene is amplified in 17%-33% of carcinosarcoma, uterine serous carcinoma, and a subset of high-grade endometrioid endometrial tumors.
The analysis of human datasets and GBM tumors revealed higher expression of p65 in GBM-associated CD68+ macrophages compared to neighboring stroma.
Of paramount importance in the recognition of oligodendroglial and astrocytic tumor cells were the double immunostainings for ATRX/GFAP, ATRX/IDH1R132H, ATRX/Iba-1 and ATRX/CD68.
Therefore, Dan-gua Fang might be an ideal drug for comprehensive intervention for glucose and lipid metabolism disorders in type 2 diabetes mellitus.
An electrochemical study of the oxidation of 8-hydroxyguanine (8-OH-Gua) at gold nanoparticles attached to single walled carbon nanotube modified edge plane pyrolytic graphite electrode (AuNP-SWCNT/EPPGE) has been carried out to develop a method for the self diagnosis of diabetes.
Consequently, Metformin - the biguanide drug of choice orally administered for diabetes type II - is anticipated to see a spike in production.
To study the toxicity features of high glucose on the endothelial cell cycle and the influence of Dan Gua-Fang, a Chinese herbal compound prescription, on the reproductive cycle of vascular endothelial cells cultivated under a high glucose condition; to reveal the partial mechanisms of Dan Gua-Fang in the prevention and treatment of endothelial injury caused by hyperglycemia in diabetes mellitus (DM); and offer a reference for dealing with the vascular complications of DM patients with long-term high blood glucose.
To study the effect of anticolchicine cytotoxicity of Dan Gua-Fang, a Chinesea Chinese), a Chinese herbal compound prescription on endothelial cells of vein (ECV304) cultivated in mediums of different glucose concentrations as well as the proliferation of those cells in the same conditions, in order to reveal the value of Dan Gua-Fang in preventing and treating endothelial damage caused by hyperglycemia in diabetes mellitus.
(1) Dan Gua-Fang at all concentrations reduced the floating cell population of ECV304 cultivated in hyperglycemia mediums.
(2) Dan Gua-Fang at all concentrations and hyperglycemia both had a function of promoting "pseudopod-like" structure formation in cultivated ECV304, but the function was not superimposed in mediums containing both hyperglycemia and Dan Gua-Fang.
(3) Colchicine reduced and even vanished the "pseudopod-like" structure of the endotheliocyte apparently cultivated in mediums of hyperglycemia or with Dan Gua-Fang.
The "pseudopod-like" structure of the endotheliocyte emerged quickly in Dan Gua-Fang groups after colchicine was removed, but it was not the case in hyperglycemia only without Dan Gua-Fang groups.
The spinodal point concentration of statistical significance of hyperglycemia cytotoxicity is 22.2 mmol/l; 1/300 Dan Gua can reverse the endothelia cytotoxicity in different concentrations of hyperglycemia.
Patients with resected stage III colon cancer who were 18 years of age or older, with an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status of 0 or 1, from four randomised controlled trials (NSABP C-08, XELOXA, X-ACT, and AVANT; 8734 patients in total) were pooled and analysed.
Based on the results of the X-ACT study, capecitabine has become one of the standard postoperative adjuvant chemotherapies for colon cancer.
In the adjuvant setting, the Xeloda in Adjuvant Colon Cancer Therapy (X-ACT) trial demonstrated that capecitabine as a single agent led to improvement in relapse-free survival (hazard ratio: 0.86, 95% confidence interval: 0.74-0.99, P = 0.04) and was associated with significantly fewer adverse events than 5-FU plus leucovorin (LV, folinic acid).
On the basis of the X-ACT trial, capecitabine was approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration, the National Institute for Clinical Excellence, and the Scottish Medicines Consortium as monotherapy for the adjuvant treatment of stage III colon cancer.
The Xeloda in Adjuvant Colon Cancer Therapy (X-ACT) study confirmed that capecitabine (Xeloda) is at least as effective and is less toxic than a bolus 5-FU and leucovorin regimen for patients with stage III colon cancer.
In the recent X-ACT (Xeloda in Adjuvant Colon cancer Therapy) trial, oral capecitabine (Xeloda) demonstrated superior efficacy and an improved safety profile compared with infused fluorouracil + leucovorin (folinic acid) [FU+LV] in patients with Dukes' C colorectal cancer.
The X-ACT trial (Xeloda in Adjuvant Colon Cancer Therapy) compared traditional bolus 5-FU/LV (as per the Mayo Clinic regimen) with capecitabine, in the adjuvant treatment of 1987 stage III colon cancer patients.
On the basis of the X-ACT trial, capecitabine was approved by the US FDA, the National Institute for Clinical Excellence and the Scottish Medicines Consortium as monotherapy for the adjuvant treatment of stage III colon cancer.
In order to specifically target GD2 overexpressed on the surface of neuroblastoma stNB-V1 cells, anti-GD2 was conjugated to chitosan modified GNRs (CGNRs).
Our results illustrated that anti-GD2-conjugated CGNRs were extensively endocytosed by GD2+ stNB-V1 neuroblastoma cells via antibody-mediated endocytosis.
In order to specifically target disialoganglioside (GD2) overexpressed on the surface of neuroblastoma stNB-V1 cells, GD2 monoclonal antibody (anti-GD2) was conjugated to acidified CNTs.
In addition to the well-known increase in glial fibrillary acidic protein and other proteins in reactive astrocytes, astrocytopathy is evidenced by deposition of abnormal proteins such as Beta-amyloid, hyper-phosphorylated tau, abnormal Alfa-synuclein, mutated huntingtin, phosphorylated TDP-43 and mutated SOD1, and PrPres , in Alzheimer's disease, tauopathies, Lewy body diseases, Huntington's disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, respectively.
Interestingly, BAG3-mediated selective macroautophagy is also involved in the clearance of aggregated proteins associated with age-related neurodegenerative disorders, like Alzheimer's disease (tau-protein), Huntington's disease (mutated huntingtin/polyQ proteins), and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (mutated SOD1).
This report is the first successful generation of neural cells using iPSCs from sleep bruxism patients with 5-HT2A polymorphism, which has the potential to elucidate the etiology and underlying mechanism of SB.
At present, variants of the 5-hydroxytryptamine receptor 2A (5-HTR2A) and interleukin-6 (IL-6) genes may be susceptible markers to develop for obstructive sleep apnea-hypopnea syndrome (OSAHS).
The results of our study showed that tumor necrosis factor-Alfa (TNF-Alfa) -308 G/A (OR = 3.70, 95 % CI = 1.39-9.83), gene-linked polymorphic region (LPR) (OR = 0.57, 95 % CI = 0.41-0.79), and variable number tandem repeat (VNTR) of the 5-hydroxytryptamine transporter gene (5-HTT) (OR = 3.44, 95 % CI = 1.49-7.95) polymorphisms were associated with OSAS risk in the Chinese population, while there was no significant association between 5-hydroxytryptamine 2A receptor (5-HTR2A) 102C/T, 5-HTR2A A1438G, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) insertion (I)/deletion (D), or leptin receptor (LEPR)-Gln 223Arg polymorphism and risk of OSAS in the Chinese population.
Our study demonstrated that TNF-Alfa 308 G/A, 5-HTT LPR, and 5-HTT-VNTR polymorphisms were associated with OSAS risk, whereas little association was observed between 5-HTR2A 102C/T, 5-HTR2A A1438G, ACE I/D, or LEPR-Gln 223Arg polymorphism and risk of OSAS in the Chinese population.
We performed a meta-analysis to better evaluate the associations between 5-HT2A, 5-HTT, and LEPR polymorphisms, and OSAS.
5-HT2A, 5-HTT, and LEPR polymorphisms and OSAS were identified in PubMed and EMBASE.
The -1438 "A" allele of 5-HT2A was identified as a candidate genetic risk factor for OSAS (OR: 2.33, 95%CI 1.49-3.66).
There was no significant association between 5-HT2A 102C/T and OSAS risk, using any model.
Eight studies were finally included in the meta-analysis of the association between 5-HTR2A gene variants (including 102T/C and 1438G/A), 5-HTT gene polymorphisms (including 5-HTT gene-linked promoter region (5-HTTLRP), and serotonin transporter intron 2 variable number tandem repeat (STin2VNTR) and OSAS risk.
The G allele of 5-HTR2A 1438G/A, long 5-HTTLPR, and 10-tandem-repeats STin2VNTR were shown to increase OSAS susceptibility, with ORs of 2.33 (A vs. G, 95% CI 1.48-3.66), 1.24 (L vs. S, 95% CI: 1.04-1.49), and 2.87 (10 vs. 12, 95% CI: 1.38-5.97), respectively.
Of the 5-HTR2A 1438G/A gene polymorphism, the AA genotype increased the OSAS risk, with an OR of 4.21 (95% CI: 2.83-6.25) in a recessive model in male OSAS patients, but no significant association was found in females.
Our meta-analysis demonstrated that polymorphisms in the 5-HTR2A 1438G/A and 5-HTT genes contributed to susceptibility to OSAS.
The serotonin 2A (5-HT2A) receptor has been implicated in obstructive sleep apnea (OSA).
Our findings suggest that upregulated functional TRPC5 gene may be one cause of EPO-induced hypertension in patients with chronic kidney disease.
TTR (transthyretin) gene could be a possible candidate for lumbosacral stenosis in Labrador retrievers based on previous human studies that have reported an association between human lumbar spinal stenosis and transthyretin protein amyloidosis.
Wild-type ATTR amyloidosis mainly involves the heart, although the reported occurrence of bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome, spinal stenosis and biceps tendon rupture in these patients speaks to more generalized protein deposition.
In all groups, but the HBD group, the livers were pretreated with FK506 and prostaglandin I2 analogue, and were preserved in University of Wisconsin solution after cardiac arrest.
We used a new vasodilator, TTC-909 (a prostaglandin I2 analog incorporated in lipid microspheres), which produced marked reduction in the pulmonary arterial pressure and resistance in an infant with primary pulmonary hypertension.
A prostaglandin I2 (PGI2) was administered before cardiac arrest by St. Thomas solution.
Recently, with the introduction of prostacyclin (Prostaglandin I2, epoprostenon) as a potent vasodilator, several reports have shown a positive effect in primary pulmonary hypertension.
Furthermore, the involvement of functional GREM1 in the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) process of glioma was investigated by detecting the expression levels of glioma-associated oncogene homologue 3 (GLI3) and EMT-related molecules.
Suppression of GLI1/GLI2 functions by a C-terminus truncated GLI3 repressor mutant (GLI3R), or by GANT61, a pharmacological inhibitor of GLI1/GLI2, reduced hTERT protein expression in human colon cancer, prostate cancer and Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) cell lines.
Inhibitor of DNA binding protein-1 (ID1) has been shown to maintain the self-renewal capacity of neural stem cells and might be involved in the therapeutic resistance of GBM.
In glioblastoma neurosphere cultures that contain cancer stem cells (GBM-CSCs), the bHLH family member inhibitors of DNA binding protein 2 and 4 (Id2 and Id4) were found to be upregulated during the differentiation of GBM-CSCs in response to histone deacetylase inhibitors.
The improvement in mitral regurgitation was greater for the mitral repair group (-2.1 +/- 0.3 vs -1.1 +/- 0.8, P &lt; .0001), and mitral regurgitation remained significantly lower on follow-up at 6 months or more (0.6 +/- 0.4 0.9 +/- 0.2, P = .002).
This study was undertaken to examine changes in 1-cysPrx expression in human cataract samples, human lens epithelial (HLE B3) cell line, and rat organ-cultured lenses in response to oxidative insult induced by H2O2 or transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1).
In a functional analysis, transient cotransfections in nonerythroid NIH/3T3 cells of SP1, SP3, BKLF, or EKLF and HS2 epsilony promoter-luciferase constructs, with or without coactivators (p300, CREB-binding protein [CBP], or p300/CBP-associated factor [PCAF]) and SCFAs, were performed.
Using our newly created Ngb overexpressing transgenic (Ngb-Tg) mice, we measured brain infarction on day 1 and day 14 after transient focal cerebral ischemia and performed neurobehavioral assessments in sensorimotor deficits on days 1, 3, 7, and 14.
Compared with wild-type controls, brain infarction volumes 1 day and 14 days after transient focal cerebral ischemia were significantly reduced in Ngb-Tg mice.
Evidence includes the observations that neuronal hypoxia and cerebral ischemia induce Ngb expression, that enhancing Ngb expression reduces--and knocking down Ngb expression increases--hypoxic neuronal injury in vitro and ischemic cerebral injury in vivo, and that Ngb-overexpressing transgenic mice are resistant to cerebral infarction.
Sono stati presentati i casi di un effetto paradosso di aggressivita sotto la possibile influenza di acepromazina e un protocollo modificato per il trattamento di un avvelenamento da permetrina nei gatti.
ADRP and perilipin localized to the phagosomal membrane, which contains M. leprae in skin biopsy specimens of lepromatous leprosy.
In this work, two novel exonic BCKDK mutations, c.520C&gt;G/p.R174G and c.1166T&gt;C/p.L389P, were identified at the homozygous state in two unrelated children with persistently reduced body fluid levels of branched-chain amino acids (BCAAs), developmental delay, microcephaly, and neurobehavioral abnormalities.
AR-12-stimulated the co-localization of Influenza, EBV and HIV virus proteins with LC3 in autophagosomes and reduced viral protein association with the chaperones HSP90, HSP70, and GRP78.
Hence, in agreement with heat shock protein 70 (HSP70) acting as Th1 cytokine-like adjuvant, an Escherichia coli-expressed r4M2e.HSP70c fusion protein comprising C-terminus of Mycobacterium tuberculosis HSP70 genetically fused to four tandem repeats of influenza A virus M2e was constructed.
Furthermore, a virus challenge experiment revealed that mice vaccinated with r4M2e.HSP70c limited the severity of influenza A disease by 100% survival rate, less sever body weight loss and delaying the onset of morbidity in mice for 2days rather than other control groups.
To prepare an effective vaccine against influenza A viruses, a chimerical DNA plasmid encoding Influenza virus M2 protein and Leishmania major HSP70 was constructed.
Our previous study have shown that a prime-boost administration of recombinant 4xM2e.HSP70c (r4M2e/H70c) fusion protein compared to conventional HA-based influenza vaccines provided full protection against lethal dose of influenza A viruses in mice.
The data reported herein show that protection against H9N2 viral challenge was significantly increased in chickens by injection of r4M2e/H70c compared with injection of conventional HA-based influenza vaccine adjuvanted with MF59 or recombinant 4xM2e (r4M2e) without HSP70c.
This protective immunity might be attributed to enhanced cell-mediated immunity, which is interpreted as increased lymphocytes proliferation, increased levels of Th1-type (IFN-Gamma) and Th2-type (IL-4) cytokines production and increased CD4(+) to CD8(+) ratios, resulting from the injection of four tandem repeats of the ectodomain of the conserved influenza matrix protein M2 (4xM2e) genetically fused to C-terminus of Mycobacterium tuberculosis HSP70 (mHSP70c).
Heat shock protein 70 (Hsp70) was identified as a cellular interaction partner of the influenza virus ribonucleoprotein (RNP) complex.
Here we demonstrated that Hsp70 was involved in the regulation of influenza A viral transcription and replication.
Furthermore, delivered Hsp70 could inhibit the replication of influenza A virus in mice.
In this study, antigenic peptides from tetanus toxin and influenza hemagglutinin complexed to human stress-inducible Hsp70 were found to enhance the proliferation and cytokine production of human antigen-specific CD4(+) T cells.
Herein, to construct a recombinant M2e-based vaccine candidate with the appropriate structural conformation and immunogenicity the corresponding nucleotide sequence from an H9N2 influenza strain was fused to the N-terminus of the truncated Mycobacterium tuberculosis HSP70(359-610), as a potent adjuvant, and following its cloning into the pPICZ alpha A plasmid the fusion gene was expressed in Pichia pastoris KM71H yeast.
According to previous reports, this study was designed to produce a novel influenza A virus recombinant fusion protein consisted of M2e, a potent immunogenic protein from influenza A virus, fused to C-terminal domain of mycobacterium tuberculosis HSP70, HSP70(359-610), as a carrier and adjuvant.
De novo mutations in ATAD3A (ATPase family AAA-domain containing protein 3A) were recently found to cause a neurological syndrome with developmental delay, hypotonia, spasticity, optic atrophy, axonal neuropathy, and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
We identified a recurrent de novo ATAD3A c.1582C&gt;T (p.Arg528Trp) variant by whole-exome sequencing (WES) in five unrelated individuals with a core phenotype of global developmental delay, hypotonia, optic atrophy, axonal neuropathy, and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
Immunoblot and mass spectrometry analyses revealed that the 800-kDa complex contained the OMM translocator protein (18-kDa) and VDAC along with IMM CYP11A1, ATPase family AAA domain-containing protein 3A (ATAD3A), and optic atrophy type 1 proteins, but not ANT.
Knockdown of ATAD3A, but not ANT or optic atrophy type 1, in Leydig cells resulted in a significant decrease in hormone-induced, but not 22R-hydroxycholesterol-supported, steroid production.
Recently, a numbers of marketed drugs for Schizophrenia are available against dopamine D2 and serotonin 5-HT2A receptors.
We identified 60 miRNAs that were significantly increased in recurrent serous ovarian carcinoma compared with primary tumor tissue, including miR-630, miR-370, and miR-575.
Three other miRNAs, miR-19b, miR-433, and miR-370 were associated with lymph node metastasis, decreased curvature, and poorly differentiated carcinoma.
A preliminary screening study suggested that down-regulation of miR-370 occurs in oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) tissue.
Squamous cell carcinoma tissues with perineural invasion had lowered miR-370 expression compared with contrasting OSCC.
Expression of four miRNAs (miR-30c, miR-30d, miR-30e-3p, miR-370) was significantly different between carcinomas and benign ovarian tissues as well as between carcinoma and borderline tissues.
Pruritus was assessed by the number of scratching bouts, whilst skin inflammation was evaluated by the extravascular accumulation of intravenously injected 125I-albumin (plasma extravasation) and myeloperoxidase (MPO) activity (neutrophil recruitment).
The neuropeptide PACAP and VPAC1 were previously found to negatively regulate megakaryopoiesis, and inhibition of their physiological pathway was found to have a thrombopoietic effect in conditions where megakaryopoiesis and thrombopoiesis were impaired, such as chemotherapy-induced thrombocytopenia and congenital thrombocytopenia.
The present study explored the thrombopoietic effect of VPAC1 inhibition in a murine model of syngeneic bone marrow transplantation (BMT) and in passive immune thrombocytopenia.
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an autoimmune disease which may lead to severe disabilities due to structural joint damage and extraarticular manifestations The dendritic cell marker CD83 belongs to the immunoglobulin superfamily and has previously been associated with autoimmune diseases.
Patients with PLCH displayed a normal expression of the maturity marker CD83 on BALF myeloid DCs.
To the differentiation-related markers, the BRAF/MAP2K1-mut LCH expressed CD14 but rarely expressed CD83 or CD86 (P &lt; .001).
On the contrary, BRAF/MAP2K1-wt LCH cells rarely expressed CD14 but expressed CD86, and some also expressed CD83 (P &lt; .001).
The protein phosphatase 1-like gene (PPM1l) was identified as causal gene for obesity and metabolic abnormalities in mice.
Three genes in this network, lipoprotein lipase (Lpl), lactamase beta (Lactb) and protein phosphatase 1-like (Ppm1l), are validated as previously unknown obesity genes, strengthening the association between this network and metabolic disease traits.
Based on previous research, we hypothesized that RES regulates FoxO1 transcriptional activity through the phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT signaling pathway to achieve an antioxidative effect on osteoporosis and then we confirmed this hypothesis in the present study.
FoxO1 is a major action target of RES to confer anti-osteoporosis function, and whose effect stems from its power to improve redox balance.
But whether FoxO1 is involved in the oxidative damage during osteoporosis is largely unknown.
In conclusion, our study revealed that the decline of FoxO1 is an important etiology factor of osteoporosis and unclosed a novel mechanism of FoxO1 regulation by TNF-Alfa.
In addition, several new PheWAS findings were identified including a cluster of association near the NDFIP1 gene for mental retardation (best SNP rs10057309, p = 4.33 x 10(-7), OR = 1.70, 95%CI = 1.38 - 2.09); association near PLCL1 gene for developmental delays and speech disorder [best SNP rs1595825, p = 1.13 x 10(-8), OR = 0.65(0.57 - 0.76)]; a cluster of associations in the IL5-IL13 region with Eosinophilic Esophagitis (EoE) [best at rs12653750, p = 3.03 x 10(-9), OR = 1.73 95%CI = (1.44 - 2.07)], previously implicated in asthma, allergy, and eosinophilia; and association of variants in GCKR and JAZF1 with allergic rhinitis in our pediatric cohorts [best SNP rs780093, p = 2.18 x 10(-5), OR = 1.39, 95%CI = (1.19 - 1.61)], previously demonstrated in metabolic disease and diabetes in adults.
177Lu-DOTATATE = lutetium octreotate; ACO = aconitase; Ad = adenine; AD = autosomal dominant; ATRX = ATRX chromatin remodeler; ccRCC = clear cell renal cell carcinoma; c-MYC = MYC proto oncognene; CoA = coenzyme A; COMT = catechol-O-methyl transferase; CPE = carboxypeptidase E; CS = citrate synthase; CT = computed tomography; DH = pyruvate dehydrogenase; DOTATATE = DOTA-octreotate; EGLN1/2 = egl-9 family hypoxia inducible factor 1/2; EGLN2/PHD1 = egl-9 family hypoxia inducible factor 2; elF-4E = eukaryotic initiation factor 4E; EMT = epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition; EPAS1/HIF2A = endothelial PAS domain protein 2/hypoxia-inducible factor 2Alfa; ERK = extracellular signal-regulated kinase; FH = fumarate hydroxylase; GSH = glutathione; H3F3A = histone 3.3 encoding gene; HIFs = Hypoxia-inducible factors; HIF-Alfa = hypoxia-inducible factor alpha; HNPGLs = head and neck paragangliomas; HRAS = HRas protooncogene; IDH = isocitrate dehydrogenase; IGF-1R = growth factor 1 receptor; KIF1B = kinesin family member 1B; MAX = myc-associated factor X; MDH2 = malate dehydrogenase; MN = metanephrine; MRI = magnetic resonance imaging; mTORC1 = mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1; MTY = methoxytyramine; NAd = nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide; NETs = neuroendocrine tumors; NF1 = neurofibromin 1; NMN = normetanephrine; OPLS-DA = orthogonal partial least square discriminant analysis; PFS = progression free survival; PHD = prolyl hydroxylase domain protein; PPGLs = Pheochromocytoma and Paragangliomas; PRRT = peptide receptor radionuclide therapy; Pvhl = von Hippel-Lindau protein; Raptor = regulatory associated protein of mTOR; RAS = rat sarcoma oncogene; RET = rearranged during transfection proto-oncogene; ROS = reactive oxygen species; S6K = S6 kinase; SDH = succinate dehydrogenase; SDHA, -B, -C, -D, = succinate dehydrogenase subunits A, B, C, D; SDHAF2 = succinate dehydrogenase complex assembly factor 2; SDHB, C, D = succinate dehydrogenase subunits B, C, D; SDHx = succinate dehydrogenase subunits; SSTRs = somatostatin receptors; SUCLG = succinyl-CoA synthase; TERRA = Telomeric Repeat-containing RNA; TET = ten-eleven-translocation methylcytosine dioxygenase; TMEM127 = transmembrane protein 127; VEGF = vascular endothelial growth factor; VHL = von Hippel-Lindau; Alfa-KGDH = alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase.
We report a case of MAX-associated renal cell carcinoma and confirm the role of TMEM127 mutations with renal cell carcinoma predisposition.
Alterations of von Hippel-Lindau (VHL), succinate dehydrogenase (SDHX), and TMEM127 have been associated with the development of pheochromocytomas (PCs) and paragangliomas (PGLs) and are also associated with the development of renal neoplasms.
Immunohistochemistry for SDHB and mutation analysis for TMEM127 was performed, in addition to analysis of The Cancer Genome Atlas datasets for SDHX and TMEM127 mutated renal cell carcinomas (RCCs).
The expanding etiology for hereditary pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas has recently included SDHA, TMEM127, MAX, and SDHAF2 as susceptibility genes.
This study analyzed the prospective, longitudinally followed up European-American-Asian Pheochromocytoma-Paraganglioma Registry for prevalence of SDHA, TMEM127, MAX, and SDHAF2 germline mutation carriers from 1993 to 2016.
Of 972 unrelated registrants without mutations in the classic pheochromocytoma- and paraganglioma-associated genes (632 female [65.0%] and 340 male [35.0%]; age range, 8-80; mean [SD] age, 41.0 [13.3] years), 58 (6.0%) carried germline mutations of interest, including 29 SDHA, 20 TMEM127, 8 MAX, and 1 SDHAF2.
Newly uncovered are 7 of 63 (11%) malignant pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas in SDHA and TMEM127 disease.
The SDHA, TMEM127, MAX, and SDHAF2 genes may contribute to hereditary pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma.
3-MT = 3-methoxytyramine; EPAS1 = endothelial pas domain protein 1; FH = fumarate hydratase; HIF2A = hypoxia inducible factor type 2A; MEN2 = multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2; NF1 = neurofibromatosis type 1; PNMT = phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase; PPGL = pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma; RET = rearranged during transfection; SDH = succinate dehydrogenase; SDHAF2 = succinate dehydrogenase complex assembly factor 2; TCA = tricarboxylic acid; TH = tyrosine hydroxylase; TMEM127 = transmembrane protein 127; VHL = von Hippel-Lindau.
This study assessed the effects of leukemia-related protein 16 (LRP16) on the regulation of pancreatic functions in mouse insulinoma (MIN6) cells.
Our recent studies have shown that a selective ABHD6 inhibitor WWL70 has anti-inflammatory and neuroprotective effects in animal models of traumatic brain injury and multiple sclerosis.
In this study, we investigated the role of targeting ABHD6 in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), an animal model of multiple sclerosis (MS).
Expression of clusterin correlates with tumor progression and therapeutic response in several human malignancies, including breast cancer.
The objective of this explorative study was to determine whether clusterin expression in breast cancer correlated with clinical pathologic characteristics and whether its expression was predictive of response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC).
We determined the clusterin expression pattern in 72 triple negative breast cancers (TNBC) treated with NAC before surgery.
Clusterin was present at higher levels in both fractions of patients with early and intermediate stages of breast cancer.
Discovery and development of a novel anticancer PEG-SMR-Clu peptide to prevent breast cancer metastasis.
PEG-SMRwt-Clu and PEG-SMRwt peptides inhibited the growth of both of MCF-7 (estrogen responsive, ER+) and MDA-MD-231 (estrogen non-responsive, ER-) human breast cancer cells in a dose and time-dependent manner, without inducing cytotoxic effects.
PEG-SMRwt-CLU peptides inhibited the growth of human breast cancer cells and blocked tumor exosome release in vitro.
Clinically, breast cancer patients possess sCLU expression only in mature CD68(+) macrophages but not in immature CD33(+) immunosuppressive myeloid cells infiltrating the tumors.
Immunoblotting and MRM-based validation in a separate cohort testified a panel of 21 proteins such as zinc-alpha2-glycoprotein, A2GL, retinol-binding protein 4, annexin A1, SAP3, SRC8, gelsolin, kininogen 1, CO9, clusterin, ceruloplasmin, and Alfa1-antitrypsin could be a panel of candidate markers that could discriminate HE breast cancer from healthy controls.
Exportin 4 (XPO4) is a novel identified candidate tumour-suppressor gene involved in the pathogenesis of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
To evaluate potential biomarkers in HCC, we employed multiple methods in this study, including qPCR, immunostaining methods and tissue microarrays (TMAs), as well as histological and pathological analysis, to assess TGFBeta, XPO4, elF5A2 and ANGPTL4 in cancerous and paracancerous liver tissues from 280 patients suffering from liver cancer.
XPO4 in cancerous liver tissue and TGFBeta1 in paracancerous liver tissue were positively correlated with tumor differentiation.
Additionally, higher levels of XPO4 in cancerous liver tissue suggested that the patient would have a better prognosis and survival rate.
However, higher production of XPO4 in paracancerous liver tissue suggested a worse prognosis.
All the results above provide new insights into better understanding biological indicators, such as XPO4, TGFBeta1, ANGPTL4 and elF5A2, in the prediction and evaluation of liver cancer, as well as signaling pathways in the control of liver cancer.
XPO4 and TGFBeta1 may serve as useful markers to evaluate the size and prognosis of liver cancer.
Exportin 4 (XPO4) is a recently-discovered candidate tumor-suppressor gene identified in a liver cancer mouse model.
To investigate the role of XPO4 in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) pathogenesis, we determined XPO4 expression and its correlation to prognosis in human primary HCC.
One gene, XPO4, encodes a nuclear export protein whose substrate, EIF5A2, is amplified in human tumors, is required for proliferation of XPO4-deficient tumor cells, and promotes hepatocellular carcinoma in mice.
In a population of 159 patients on renal replacement therapy (RDT) we performed a 1-yr prospective observational study, with common parameters to indicate cardiovascular pathologies (PAS, LVMI), calcium-phosphorous metabolism (Ca, PO 4 , Ca x PO 4 ), dialytic adequacy (Kt/V, URR%), nutritional status (nPCR, Alb, K), and anemia (hemoglobin (Hb)).
Based on serial mortality rates for the general population of England and Wales, significantly increased mortality was shown for cancers of the pharynx (observed (Obs) 4, expected (Exp) 0.7, standardised mortality ratio (SMR) 559, p&lt;0.05), non-malignant diseases of the respiratory system (Obs 61, Exp 43.0, SMR 142, p&lt;0.05), and non-malignant diseases of the genitourinary system (Obs 10, Exp 4.1, SMR 243, p&lt;0.05).
Non-significantly increased SMRs were shown for lung cancer (Obs 45, Exp 40.7, SMR 111) and cancer of the prostate (Obs 9, Exp 7.5, SMR 116).
In this largest-ever GWAS meta-analysis for nicotine dependence and the largest-ever cross-ancestry GWAS meta-analysis for any smoking phenotype, we reconfirmed the well-known CHRNA5-CHRNA3-CHRNB4 genes and further yielded a novel association in the DNA methyltransferase gene DNMT3B.
The relationship of HTR4 (rs3995090), HTR2A (rs6313), GRIK5 (rs8099939), GRIN2B (rs2268132), and CHRNB4 (rs1948) gene polymorphisms and COPD, as well as the contribution of these polymorphisms to the variations in quantitative characteristics that describe respiratory function, smoking behavior, and nicotine dependence was assessed in an ethnically homogeneous Tatar population.
Genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have identified associations between the CHRNA5-CHRNA3-CHRNB4 gene cluster and smoking heaviness and nicotine dependence.
Polymorphisms in the CHRNA5-CHRNA3-CHRNB4 gene cluster (Chr15q25) have been robustly associated with nicotine dependence, including genome-wide studies, as well as with cognitive and neuropsychological measures.
Here, we evaluated the effect of polymorphisms in CHRNA5-CHRNA3-CHRNB4 gene cluster and their interaction with tobacco smoking status on cognition in patients with Attention Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD).
Eight SNPs from the CHRNA5-CHRNA3-CHRNB4 gene cluster were evaluated on a clinical sample of 403 adults with ADHD.
The associations between CHRNA5-CHRNA3-CHRNB4 variants and cigarettes per day (CPD), the Fagerstroem Test for Nicotine Dependence (FTND), and craving were analyzed in data from 662 lifetime smokers from an Israeli adult Jewish household sample.
We found a significant increase in levels of adhesion molecules (VCAM-1) and selectins (E-selectin) in parallel with increased severity of diabetic retinopathy, with a significant difference of inflammatory markers between stages of retinopathy.
Our aim was to investigate the role of soluble E-selectin in the formation of diabetic retinopathy.
An elevated E-selectin level can play a role in the development of diabetic retinopathy, but it does not seem to alter disease severity.
However, glycemic control and the reduction of cardiovascular risk factors may also alter the level of E-selectin that might play a role in the prevention of diabetic retinopathy.
To evaluate efficacy of the treatment, the progression of the disease (number of laser treatments, number of bevacizumab treatments, and incidence of retinal detachment) was evaluated by serial ophthalmologic examinations, and plasma soluble E-selectin levels were measured weekly.
After adjusting for age, glycemic control, and other potential confounders, baseline plasma levels of E-selectin were associated significantly with progression of DR, E-selectin and tumor necrosis factor-Alfa (TNF-Alfa) levels with incidence of proliferative DR (PDR), and soluble intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (sICAM-1) and TNF-Alfa levels with incidence of macular edema (ME).
The 6-HT was administrated by perfusion and ejection in "brain slices" of hippocampus, inducing epileptic activity after its administration; the toxin was not able to block the epileptogenic crisis observed in the chronic model of the epilepsy, suggesting that 6-HT did not block the overactive GluRs responsible for this epileptic activity.
In patients with systemic sclerosis (SSc), the relationship between innate immune activation, represented by increased expression of interferon (IFN)-regulated genes, and vascular injury/activation, manifest by increased endothelin-1 (ET-1), endothelin converting enzyme-1 (ECE1) and intercellular adhesion molecule-1, is uncertain.
Recent findings indicate that the level of SR-BI expression correlate with aggressiveness and poor survival in breast and prostate cancer.
Furthermore, we performed immunohistochemistry analysis on human primary prostate cancer tissue sections derived from patients to investigate the correlation of SR-BI with clinicopathological parameters and the mTOR target pS6.
In contrast to LDLR, we identified SR-BI mRNA and protein expression to be induced in high Gleason grade primary prostate cancers.
We identified SR-BI to indicate human prostate cancer formation, suggesting that increased levels of SR-BI may be involved in the generation of a castration-resistant phenotype.
Silencing of SR-BI may impact the ability of prostate cancer cells, particularly those of castration-resistant state, to maintain the intracellular supply of androgens by removing a supply of cholesterol.
The down-regulation of SR-BI significantly impacts PSA production of prostate cancer cells, as well as the viability of C4-2 cells in the presence and absence of HDL.
This may indicate a deficiency in cholesterol availability to the androgen synthesis pathway or may implicate a role for SR-BI in prostate cancer signal transduction pathways.
play roles in preterm labor and preterm premature rupture of membranes (pPROM); 3) integrated aspects of maternal and fetal host responses (inflammation, altered immune adaptations, endocrine and paracrine mechanisms) play increasingly understood roles in premature activation of parturition; and 4) identification and systemic treatment of common genitourinary infections, most importantly bacterial vaginosis (BV), reduce the risks of preterm delivery and PROM.
Univariate analysis showed the following to be significant predictors of PPROM at &lt; 35 weeks: a past history of PTD between 25 and 30 weeks (P &lt; 0.008), cerclage in the current pregnancy (P &lt; 0.0001), bacterial vaginosis (P &lt; 0.011), CL &lt; 25 mm (P &lt; 0.0001) and CF &gt; 25% (P &lt; 0.0001).
In this study, localization of gelatinase activities in six cases of glioblastoma, two cases of anaplastic astrocytoma, and six cases of low-grade astrocytomas was investigated by film in situ zymography (FIZ).
In situ hybridization of the null cell line HLN-STL-C established from an adult T-cell leukemia patient showed that 100% of the cells contained both EBERs and LMP1 mRNA and about 0.1% of the cells contained gp350/220 mRNA, indicating that a few of the null cells which carried the EBV genome spontaneously entered the late EBV replication cycle.
IQ and CELF-3 performance were highly interrelated regardless of whether subjects had autism or were controls.
Both IQ and CELF-3 ability were positively correlated with STG in controls, but a different pattern was observed in subjects with autism.
In controls, left STG gray matter was significantly (r = .42, p &lt; or = .05) related to receptive language on the CELF-3; in contrast, a zero order correlation was found with autism.
Here, we showed that DUSP10 knockout (KO) mice had increased intestinal epithelial cell (IEC) proliferation and migration and developed less severe colitis than wild-type (WT) mice in response to dextran sodium sulphate (DSS) treatment, which is associated with increased ERK1/2 activation and Kruppel-like factor 5 (KLF5) expression in IEC.
Models of painful small-fiber sensory neuropathy were developed and several laboratories have progressed in the conception of TRPV1 agonists and antagonists.
TRPV1 is involved in oxidant stress-induced pain and in neuronal injury, contributing to diabetic sensory neuropathy.
Despite the impediments posed by phenotypic and genetic heterogeneity among women with PCOS, investigation into one locus, the DENND1A gene, is providing insight into the ovarian steroidogenesis.
We conducted a meta-analysis to evaluate the rs10818854, rs2479106, and rs10986105 polymorphism in DENND1A gene with PCOS susceptibility.
In conclusion, the DENND1A gene variant is likely to have influence on PCOS risk.
PCOS has a strong genetic component, and genome-wide association studies have identified several candidate genes, notably DENND1A, which encodes connecdenn 1, involved in trafficking of endosomes.
Furthermore, overexpression of DENND1A variant 2 in normal theca cells resulted in a PCOS phenotype with increased androgen production.
In addition, GWAS have suggested that DENND1A, epidermal growth factor signaling, and DNA repair pathways play a role in PCOS pathogenesis.
The rs2479106 and rs10818854 polymorphisms in the DENND1A gene have been reported to be extensively associated with risk of polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS).
Overall, significant increase of PCOS risk was found between DENND1A-rs10818854 and PCOS susceptibility.
This meta-analysis suggested that rs2479106 and rs10818854 polymorphisms in the DENND1A gene were associated with increased risk of PCOS.
Variant 2 of the DENND1A gene was found overexpressed in PCOS theca cells and confirmed to enhance androgen production.
Our previous research had identified three susceptibility loci (rs2479106, DENND1A; rs13405728, LHCGR; rs13429458, THADA) for PCOS in Han Chinese women.
Three of the eleven variants associated with PCOS in the Han Chinese genome-wide association studies were also associated with PCOS in at least one European population when corrected for multiple testing (DENND1A, THADA and YAP1).
MicroRNA-106a-5p (MiR-106a-5p), a small non-coding RNA, has been reported to be downregulated in astrocytoma, osteosarcoma and colorectal cancer.
The study aimed to evaluate the effects of miR-106a on prostate cancer cells and the underlying molecular mechanism.
MiR-106a as an oncogene could promote proliferation and metastasis of prostate cancer cells by directly targeting PTEN in vivo and in vitro.
CXCL1 secreted by hAdSCs downregulated miR-106a expression in triple negative breast cancer, and resulted in ABCG2 upregulation and doxorubicin resistance.
Our findings suggest that CXCL1 secreted by hAdSCs elicits doxorubicin resistance through miR-106a-mediated ABCG2 upregulation in triple negative breast cancer.
Copy number gains in SOX2 in the region of 3q26-28 occur in 94% of SQCCs, and appear to act both early and late in disease progression by stabilizing the initial squamous injury response in stem cells and promoting growth of invasive carcinoma.
A key feature of high-grade serous ovarian carcinoma (HGSOC) is frequent amplification of the 3q26 locus harboring PRKC-l (PRKCI).
Four loci, 5p15.33 (TERT), 6p21.3 (BTNL2), 3q28 (TP63) and 17q24.2 (BPTF), previously shown to be strongly associated with overall lung adenocarcinoma risk in East Asians, were re-discovered as loci associated with a higher susceptibility to EGFR mutation-positive lung adenocarcinoma.
Chromosome 3q26-28 is a critical region of genomic amplification in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), particularly lung squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs).
The PIK3CA gene at chromosome 3q26.32 was found to be amplified in up to 45% of patients with squamous cell carcinoma of the lung.
Aspirin/NSAID interacted with MAP3K7 (colon cancer) and with MAPK14, NFAT5, and TRAF2 (rectal cancer); smoking cigarettes interacted with NFAM1 and NFAT2 (colon cancer) and MAPK8, NFAT5, and TNFRSF1A (rectal cancer); BMI interacted with NFAM1 and NFAT5 (colon cancer) and with MAPK8 and TNFRSF1A (rectal cancer).
Previously, we have cloned the cDNAs for the meningioma expressed antigen 6 (MGEA6) and its splice variant MGEA11.
Here, we show that antibodies against recombinantly expressed MGEA6/11 are found in 41.7% (10/24) of the sera from meningioma patients and in 2/8 sera of glioblastoma patients, whereas no response was seen in 12 sera from healthy persons.
The immune response to MGEA6/11 is frequent in both meningioma and glioma patients and may likely be attributed to overexpression of the MGEA6/11 protein in the tumor cells.
The meningioma expressed antigen-6 (MGEA6) was originally identified as an immunogenic antigen in meningioma patients.
The clones were sequenced, and sequence comparison revealed that the seven clones represent five different genes, providing evidence that meningiomas express a spectrum of immunoreactive antigens, which were termed meningioma expressed antigens (MGEAs).
These data suggest that the newly identified MGEA genes may be useful for diagnosis and possibly therapy of meningioma.
The longest open reading frame was found to be 2412 bp encoding an immunoreactive antigen termed meningioma expressed antigen 6 (MEA6).
Using the keywords [St John's Wort OR Hypericum perforatum OR hypericin OR hyperforin OR johanniskraut OR] AND [depression OR antidepressant OR SSRI], a preliminary search (without language restriction) on the PubMed, Ovid, Clinical Trials Register of the Cochrane Collaboration Depression, Anxiety and Neurosis Group, Cochrane Field for Complementary Medicine, China National Knowledge Infrastructure and WanFang database yielded 5428 papers between 1-Jan-1960 and 1-May-2016.
There is evidence to suggest that caregivers of patients with head and neck cancer (HNC) are susceptible to post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) symptoms.
Evidence suggests that patients with head and neck cancer (HNC) are susceptible to post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).
Among distressed HNC survivors, higher PTG was associated with lower tumor stage, absence of an anxiety disorder, absence of an alcohol use disorder, and better social functioning.
Although lysyl oxidase-like 1 (LOXL1) is known as the principal genetic risk factor for pseudoexfoliation (PEX) syndrome, a major cause of glaucoma and cardiovascular complications, no functional variants have been identified to date.
Recent studies have shed new light on the genetic factors underlying pseudoexfoliation syndrome, growing our understanding of the role of the lysyl oxidase-like 1 (LOXL1) gene and its various polymorphisms as well as identifying new genetic associations.
We found that TAPP2, syntrophin, and utrophin are coexpressed in normal human B cells and B-chronic lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL) cells.
CREB1 expression, which was activated by E2F, was coupled with RFC3 expression during the G1/S progression in the KG-1 acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cell line.
The National Reference Center for equine infectious anemia (EIA) validated a commercial ELISA (Eradikit(R) EIAV Indirect ELISA, In3diagnostic(R), Turin, Italy) employing a chimeric recombinant gag and env peptide for the detection of EIA virus antibodies, following the guidelines of the World Organization for Animal Health.
The development of anaemia in feline leukaemia virus (FeLV)-infected cats is associated with the emergence of a novel viral subgroup, FeLV-C. FeLV-C arises from the subgroup that is transmitted, FeLV-A, through alterations in the amino acid sequence of the receptor binding domain (RBD) of the envelope glycoprotein that result in a shift in the receptor usage and the cell tropism of the virus.
These results suggest that the interaction between sf-Stk and the envelope proteins of the polycythemia- and anemia-inducing variants of SFFV is architecturally different.
We conclude that the common clinical features of patients with an isolated mutation of ZRSR2 are a macrocytic anemia without leukopenia, thrombocytopenia or an increase in marrow blast percentage.
Recent studies have shown that recombinant human thrombomodulin (rhTM) improves exacerbation and clinical outcome of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, but the mechanism remains unknown.
This furthers our understanding of the regulatory mechanism of cardiac sarcomere assembly in both physiologic and pathologic contexts, and uncovers a potential novel pathway to cardiomyopathy through modulating the Stk38/Rbm24 protein activity.
This study uncovers a potential novel pathway to cardiomyopathy through down-regulation of the RBP Rbm24.
Nsp3 proteins of Semliki Forest (SFV), Sindbis (SINV), and Chikungunya viruses all showed avid and SH3-dependent binding to amphiphysins.
Colitis severity was assessed by body weight, colonoscopy, colon length, histological score, cytokine mRNA expression, and myeloperoxidase (MPO) activity.
Pigmentary hypertrichosis and non-autoimmune insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (PHID) is associated with recessive mutations in SLC29A3, encoding the equilibrative nucleoside transporter hENT3 expressed in mitochondria, causing PHID and H syndromes, familial Rosai-Dorfman disease, and histiocytosis-lymphadenopathy-plus syndrome.
The patients share many of the characteristics previously reported with H syndrome, including hyperpigmentation, hypertrichosis, short stature, insulin-dependent diabetes, arthritis and systemic inflammation, as well as some novel features, including selective IgG subclass deficiency and autoimmune hepatitis.
Loss of function recessive mutations in the SLC29A3 gene that encodes human equilibrative nucleoside transporter 3 (ENT3) have been identified in patients with pigmented hypertrichotic dermatosis with insulin-dependent diabetes (PHID).
Thus, apoptotic loss of islet Beta-cells may contribute to the occurrence of autoantibody-negative insulin-dependent diabetes in individuals with non-functional ENT3 mutations.
H syndrome and pigmented hypertrichosis with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (PHID) had been described as two autosomal recessive disorders.
The term H syndrome was coined to denote the major clinical findings which include hyperpigmentation, hypertrichosis, hearing loss, hepatosplenomegaly, hypogonadism, hyperglycemia/diabetes mellitus and hallux valgus/flexion contractures.
Mutations in SLC29A3 lead to pigmentary hypertrichosis and non-autoimmune insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (PHID) and H syndromes, familial Rosai-Dorfman disease, and histiocytosis-lymphadenopathy plus syndrome.
This report describes an insulin-dependent diabetes patient with a syndromic presentation in whom a homozygous SLC29A3 mutation was identified.
These clinical features overlapped with pigmented hypertrichosis with insulin-dependent diabetes (PHID), H syndrome, Faisalabad histiocytosis and sinus histiocytosis with massive lymphadenopathy (SHML), all of which are also caused by SLC29A3 mutations.
Germline mutations in the SLC29A3 gene result in a range of recessive, clinically related syndromes: H syndrome, pigmented hypertrichosis with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus syndrome, Faisalabad histiocytosis, and sinus histiocytosis with massive lymphadenopathy.
Characteristic ADC map features were identified for protrusion, extrusion and sequester types of lumbar disk herniations, spondylolisthesis, reactive Modic endplate changes, Pfirrmann grades of IVD degeneration, and compromised spinal nerves.
We measured T2 relaxation time of the intervertebral discs (IVD) and facet joints (FJ) in patients with degenerative spondylolisthesis (DS) and no spondylolisthesis (NS) and investigated the characteristics of these parts in DS.
Early stages of scoliosis and spondylolisthesis entail changes in the intervertebral disc (IVD) structure and biochemistry.
Therefore, this study aims to develop the AMRSID (analysis of MR signal intensity distribution) method to analyze the 3D distribution of the MR signal intensity within the IVD and to evaluate their sensitivity to scoliosis and spondylolisthesis and their severities.
IVDs were collected from patients with lumbar fracture, vertebral tumor, disc herniation or spondylolisthesis.
"Pedra hume caa" is the common name of five species of Myrcia genus used as traditional medicine for the treatment of diabetes mellitus.
Some of the species are used in folk medicine, such as a group known as "pedra-hume-caa" or "pedra-ume-caa" or "insulina vegetal" (insulin plant) that it is used for the treatment of diabetes.
Some of the species are used in folk medicine, such as a group known as "pedra-hume-caa" or "pedra-ume-caa" or "insulina vegetal" (insulin plant) that it is used for the treatment of diabetes.
Some of the species are used in folk medicine, such as a group known as "pedra-hume-caa" or "pedra-ume-caa" or "insulina vegetal" (insulin plant) that it is used for the treatment of diabetes.
Adult Tshz1(+/-) mice display glucose intolerance due to defects in glucose-stimulated insulin secretion associated with reduced Pdx1 and Clec16a expression in Tshz1(+/-) islets.
Lastly, we demonstrate that TSHZ1 levels are reduced in human islets of donors with type 2 diabetes.
Thus, we position Tshz1 in the transcriptional network of maturing Beta-cells and suggest that its dysregulation could contribute to the islet phenotype of human type 2 diabetes.
Material e Metodos: Revisao bibliografica, atraves da Medline e PubMed, utilizando como palavras-chave: 'borderline personality disorder', 'cognitive-behavioral therapy', 'efficacy'.
#目#的#： #研#究#阻#塞#性#睡#眠#呼#吸#暂#停#低#通#气#综#合#征(obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea syndrome, OSAHS)#合#并#难#治#性#高#血#压(resistant hypertension, RH)#患#者#中, OSAHS#的#治#疗#对#血#压#控#制#的#意#义#。 #方#法#： 80#例OSAHS#合#并RH#患#者[#至#少3#种#抗#高#血#压#药(#包#括#利#尿#剂)#治#疗, #仍#不#能#将#收#缩#压#和#舒#张#压#控#制#在#目#标#水#平(140/90 mmHg, 1 mmHg=0.133 kPa)]#行#手#术#或#持#续#正#压#通#气#治#疗, #治#疗#前#及#治#疗6#个#月#后#行#多#道#睡#眠#监#测#和#动#态#血#压#监#测, #记#录#呼#吸#暂#停#低#通#气#指#数(apnea hypopnea index, AHI)#、#最#低#血#氧#饱#和#度(SaO(2))#、#血#压#、#夜#间#血#压#下#降#率, #比#较#治#疗#前#后#降#压#药#物#种#类#的#变#化#。 #结#果#： #治#疗#后, AHI#由(32.9+/-10.8)#次/h(x+/-s, #下#同)#降#至(9.4+/-6.5)#次/h, #最#低SaO(2)#由(0.682+/-0.062)#增#至(0.884+/-0.056), #差#异#均#有#统#计#学#意#义(t#值#分#别#为18.863#、26.614, P#值#均&lt;0.001)#。#全#天#收#缩#压#由(150.5+/-9.8) mmHg#降#至(140.7+/-6.8) mmHg, #舒#张#压#由(97.8+/-7.3) mmHg#降#至(88.6+/-6.3) mmHg#；#日#间#收#缩#压#由(154.3+/-8.9) mmHg#降#至(144.8+/-5.8) mmHg, #舒#张#压#由(100.6+/-7.4) mmHg#降#至(91.3+/-5.5) mmHg#；#夜#间#收#缩#压#由(145.5+/-8.8) mmHg#降#至(135.8+/-5.7) mmHg, #舒#张#压#由(93.8+/-6.4) mmHg#降#至(84.6+/-5.9) mmHg, #差#异#均#有#统#计#学#意#义(t#值#分#别#为7.832#、6.903#、7.005#、6.848#、8.025#、7.554, P#值#均&lt;0.001)#。#夜#间#收#缩#压#下#降#值#为(11.5+/-2.2)mmHg#、#舒#张#压#下#降#值#为(10.2+/-3.1)mmHg, #日#间#收#缩#压#下#降#值#为(9.0+/-2.8)mmHg#、#舒#张#压#下#降#值#为(7.9+/-3.5)mmHg, #夜#间#收#缩#压#及#舒#张#压#下#降#较#日#间#更#明#显, #差#异#均#有#统#计#学#意#义(t#值#分#别#为9.732#、6.936, P#值#均&lt;0.001)#。#夜#间#血#压#下#降#率&lt;10%#的#患#者#比#例#由#治#疗#前#的75.0%#降#为#治#疗#后#的37.5%, #差#异#有#统#计#学#意#义(X(2)=22.857, P&lt;0.01), #提#示#血#压#昼#夜#节#律#变#化#情#况#好#转#。45#例#患#者#服#用#的#降#压#药#物#种#类#减#少, #由#治#疗#前#的(3.2+/-0.4)#种#减#为#治#疗#后#的(2.6+/-0.5)#种, #差#异#有#统#计#学#意#义(t=9.276, P&lt;0.01)#。 #结#论#： OSAHS#合#并RH#患#者#中, #治#疗OSAHS#能#有#效#改#善#血#压#控#制#水#平, #改#善#血#压#昼#夜#节#律, #减#少#降#压#药#物#的#使#用#。.
In case of coronary atherosclerosis the organism reaction to expressed CMC is manifested basically by intensified synthesis of cathodic complement-C3-similar autoprecipitin, but in case of endocarditis--by consumption of one with formation of anodic autoprecipitin and by intensified synthesis of autoprecipitating immunoglobulin G. These membranotropic autoimmune reactions are identical with the organism reactions to alien (heterologous) agents and differentially participate in development both of basic disease and perioperational complications after cardiac operations using trans- and implants, hence, they should be taken into account during membrane-stabilising and immunocorrecting therapy of recipients.
In cultured rat hepatoma (H4IIE) cells, TNF-Alfa significantly increased hemopexin mRNA accumulation.
This analytical method was applied to an in vitro diagnostic multivariate index assay where a panel of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) biomarkers comprising alpha-fetoprotein, hemopexin, and alpha-2-macroglobulin (A2M) was examined in terms of the serum level and their fuco-fractions.
The aim of this study was to identify new target genes for microRNA polymorphisms (miR-146aC&gt;G and miR-196a2T&gt;C) in primary ovarian insufficiency (POI).
In addition, several specific miRNAs (miR-23a, miR-27a, miR-22-3p, miR-146a, miR-196a, miR-290-295, miR-423, and miR-608) related to POI are also examined in order to highlight the issues that deserve further investigation.
(2) Expand sample size to 14 cases for endometriosis group and 16 cases for control group.Reverse transcription (RT)-PCR technique was utilized to detect the expression of miR- 142- 5p, miR- 146a- 5p and miR- 543 in endometrial tissues, and verify miRNA microarray results.
(1) miRNA and mRNA microarray screening results showed that, among the endometrial tissues of patients with endometriosis infertility and with implantation window phase, 6 differentially expressed miRNA were indentified, among which miR-142-5p, miR-146a-5p, miR-1281, miR-940, miR-4634 showed significantly enhanced expression and miR- 543 showed significantly inhibited expression.
(2) RT- PCR test showed that the average levels of expression of miR-142-5p and miR-146a-5p in implantation window phase endometrium in endometriosis group were 8.3+/-10.6 and 1.9+/-0.8 respectively; the average levels of that in control group were 1.1+/-0.6 and 0.9+/-0.4, respectively.
There are multiple differential expressions of miRNA in the implantation window phase endometrium tissues of endometriosis infertility patients, among which miR-142-5p and miR-146a-5p show significantly enhanced expression and may affect embryo implantation by acting on a variety of endometrial receptivity marker molecules.
We also analyze the ezrin-meditated regulation of critical pathways associated with asthma, such as the RhoA, Rho-associated protein kinase (ROCK), and protein kinase A (cAMP/PKA) pathways.
Pneumothorax is a well-recognized complication of central venous line insertion (CVL).
We identify and replicate an association between the constituents of the apical plasma membrane and CF lung disease (p = 0.0099 and p = 0.0180, respectively) and highlight a role for the SLC9A3-SLC9A3R1/2-EZR complex in contributing to CF lung disease.
The BrGR-expressing yeast strain induced the activation of metabolic enzymes (Hxt, G6PDH, GAPDH and Ald), antioxidant systems (Gpx, Trx2, Trx3, Trr1, Tsa1 and porin) and molecular chaperones (Hsp104, Hsp90, Hsp70, Hsp42, Hsp26, Grp, Sti1 and Zpr1), which led to lower oxidative protein damage after a reduction in the level of cellular ROS in the BrGR-expressing yeast strain exposed to H(2)O(2) than in the wild-type yeast strain.
In this review, we focus on the use of these agents in children to treat inflammatory skin diseases other than psoriasis, including atopic dermatitis, hidradenitis suppurativa, pemphigus vulgaris, bullous pemphigoid, and toxic epidermal necrolysis, with an emphasis on the use of etanercept, infliximab, rituximab, omalizumab, and ustekinumab.
The addition of distamycin A enhanced the double-strand DNA cleavage at the 5'-CCT-3'/3'-GGA-5' and 5'-CCA-3'/3'-GGT-5' sequences, with a two-nucleotide 3'-stagger of the cleaved residues.
Besides, we screened for all the known genes related to axonal autosomal recessive Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT2A2/HMSN2A2/MFN2, CMT2B1/LMNA, CMT2B2/MED25, CMT2B5/NEFL, ARCMT2F/dHMN2B/HSPB1, CMT2K/GDAP1, CMT2P/LRSAM1, CMT2R/TRIM2, CMT2S/IGHMBP2, CMT2T/HSJ1, CMTRID/COX6A1, ARAN-NM/HINT and GAN/GAN), for the genes related to autosomal recessive hereditary spastic paraplegia with thin corpus callosum and axonal peripheral neuropathy (SPG7/PGN, SPG15/ZFYVE26, SPG21/ACP33, SPG35/FA2H, SPG46/GBA2, SPG55/C12orf65 and SPG56/CYP2U1), as well as for the causative gene of peripheral neuropathy with or without agenesis of the corpus callosum (SLC12A6).
Plasmacytomas often present as a collection of findings known as POEMS-syndrome (Polyneuropathy, Organomegaly, Endocrinopathy, M-Protein spike, and Skin changes).
POEMS (acronym for polyneuropathy, organomegaly, endocrinopathy, M protein myeloma and skin changes), is a rare disease which occurs in the setting of plasma cell dyscrasias.
Previous case reports and studies have shown that anti-myelin-associated glycoprotein (MAG) antibody can be detected in patients with polyneuropathy without any detectable M-protein.
Polyneuropathy, Organomegaly, Endocrinopathy, M protein and Skin changes (POEMS) syndrome is rare plasma cell dyscrasia with multisystem involvement.
The name comes from the five characteristic features: Polyneuropathy, organomegaly, endocrinopathy, M protein and skin changes.
Polyneuropathy, organomegaly, endocrinopathy, M-protein, and skin changes (POEMS) syndrome and monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS) are paraproteinemic disorders that can cause demyelinating polyneuropathy.
Polyneuropathy, organomegaly, endocrinopathy, M protein, and skin changes (POEMS) syndrome, a form of osteosclerotic myeloma, is a multisystem disease related to a monoclonal plasma cell proliferative disorder.
She had been treated with cyclophosphamide, melphalan, lenalidomide and corticosteroids for POEMS syndrome (polyneuropathy, organomegaly, endocrinopathy or edema, M protein, skin changes).
Polyneuropathy, organomegaly, endocrinopathy, M-protein, and skin changes (POEMS) syndrome is a rare cause of demyelinating neuropathy, with multi-organ involvement characterised by plasma cell dyscrasia and VEGF overproduction.
As a consequence, leukemia induction and leukemia maintenance were severely impaired in Inca1-/- bone marrow cells.
The re-initiation of leukemia was also significantly inhibited in absence of Inca1-/- in MLL-AF9- and c-myc/BCL2-positive leukemia mouse models.
These findings indicate distinct functional properties of Inca1 in normal hematopoietic cells compared to leukemia initiating cells.
This preliminary study indicated the tumor suppressing roles of miR-372 in cell cycle progression of TW01 cells, possibly via the down-regulation of CDK2 and CCNA1 as well as the up-regulation of CDKN1A and INCA1.Key Words: apoptosis, microRNA, nasopharyngeal carcinoma, miR-372, CDK2, CCNA1.
Furthermore, blasts from acute lymphoid leukemia and acute myeloid leukemia patients expressed significantly reduced INCA1 levels highlighting its relevance for growth control in vivo.
Our objectives were (i) to assess the current prevalence of childhood overweight (including obesity) (OWOB) in France and its relationship with comprehensive socioeconomic status (SES) indicators and (ii) to examine trends in OWOB prevalence and changes in energy intake (EI) and sedentary behavior (SED) based on the previous INCA 1 (Individuelle Nationale des Consommations Alimentaires) data (1998-1999).
Both estradiol and global ischemia markedly increased ERalpha, but not ERbeta, protein in CA1.
It has been reported that BMPR2 is associated with chondrosarcoma.
Moreover, the detection of BMPR2 is more frequent in dedifferentiated chondrosarcomas (DDCS) than in conventional chondrosarcomas (CCS).
BMPR2, phospho-SMAD1/5 (pSMAD1/5), and runt-related transcription factor 2 (RUNX2) expressions were found to be associated with the pathological grades of chondrosarcoma and could be a promising target of treatment outcome.
It has been demonstrated that more prevalent expression of bone morphogenetic protein receptor 2 (BMPR2) has been detected in dedifferentiated chondrosarcomas than conventional chondrosarcomas.
Here, we find that BMPR2 inhibition induces apoptosis and autophagy of chondrosarcoma.
We found that BMPR2 expression was correlated with the clinicopathological features of chondrosarcomas, and could predict the treatment outcome.
Knockdown of BMPR2 by small interfering RNA results in growth inhibition in chondrosarcoma cells.
Silencing BMPR2 promoted G2/M cell cycle arrest, induced chondrosarcoma cell apoptosis through caspase-3-dependent pathway via repression of X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein (XIAP) and induced autophagy of chondrosarcoma cells via XIAP-Mdm2-p53 pathway.
Inhibition of autophagy induced by BMPR2 small interfering RNA (siBMPR2) sensitized chondrosarcoma cells to siBMPR2-induced apoptotic cell death, suggesting that autophagy has a protective role for chondrosarcoma cells in context of siBMPR2-induced apoptotic cell death.
Taken together, our results suggest that BMPR2 has a significant role in the tumorigenesis of chondrosarcoma, and could be an important prognostic marker for chondrosarcoma.
BMPR2 inhibition could eventually provide a promising therapy for chondrosarcoma treatment.
The role of Beta-defensin-1 in asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) remains unclear.
In Japanese and Chinese populations, two different beta-defensin-1 polymorphisms have been associated with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease phenotypes.
The autosomal recessive ataxias are separated into Friedreich ataxia, ataxia due to vitamin E deficiency, ataxia due to Abeta-lipoproteinemia, Refsum disease, late-onset Tay-Sachs disease, cerebrotendineous xanthomatosis, spinocerebellar ataxia with axonal neuropathy, ataxia telangiectasia, ataxia telangiectasia-like disorder, ataxia with oculomotor apraxia 1 and 2, spastic ataxia of Charlevoix-Saguenay, Cayman ataxia, Marinesco-Sjoegren syndrome, and autosomal recessive mitochondrial ataxias (AR-CPEO, SANDO, SCAE, AHS, IOSCA, MEMSA, LBSL CoQ-deficiency, PDC-deficiency).
Only patients presenting PEO as part of their clinical phenotype had POLG mutations, in seven of them together with myopathic signs and in one with a sensori-motor peripheral neuropathy.
Moreover, it is suggested that blockades of 5-HT3 and 5-HT4 receptors are not relevant to the control of motion sickness; and furthermore, it suggested that blocking 5-HT4 receptors in addition to 5-HT3 receptors does not have an additional effect on the control of cisplatin-induced emesis, but that 5-HT4 receptors are at least partly involved in the mechanism of emesis induced by copper sulfate.
Therefore, we used Biolog GN2 microplates to analyze the ability of 103 clinical, predominantly diarrheal, isolates of Aeromonas to use various carbon sources, and we verified whether, among the substrates metabolized by these strains, there were some endogenous to the human intestine.
RP30 was one of these strains that was randomly selected and analysed by using a morphological, physiological and biochemical plate, Biolog GN2 Microplate System and API 20E system.
Histological and clinical diagnoses of the 14 patients were as follows: IgA nephropathy 3, non-IgA GN 2, and asymptomatic significant microscopic hematuria [more than 100 red blood cells per high-power field (x400)] with or without proteinuria 9.
The incidence of membranous form of glomerulonephritis was high (34 out of 44 kidney biopsy cases, 77%), the rest of patients showing mesangiocapillary GN-8 (18%) and mesangial proliferative GN-2 (5%).
In organ cultures, nephrosis-producing IBV strains (GN-2 and M-41) were slightly more ciliostatic and respiratory strains (Beaudette and Kita-1/Tokushima) less ciliostatic at 40.5 degrees C than at 37 degrees C. Mortality of chicken embryos infected with the GN-2, M-41 and Kita-1/Tokushima strains was greater at 40.5 degrees C than at 37 degrees C, while the reverse was true of the Beaudette strain which caused no embryo mortality at 40.5 degrees C. The Beaudette strain of IBV was the only one which could not be recovered from the kidneys of young chickens four days after infection.
In addition, in Alzheimer's disease we found simple gangliosides (GN2, GM3) to be elevated in the frontal and parietal cortex, which might correlate accelerated lysosomal degradation of gangliosides and/or astrogliosis occurring during neuronal death.
The aim of this study was to investigate the immunoreactivity to tryptase and to cathepsin-G of MC from human cutaneous mastocytosis and to compare their number in normal skin and cutaneous mastocytosis.
Morphometric evaluation of MC number demostrated that the number of both tryptase- and cathepsin-G-positive MC was significantly higher in cutaneous mastocytosis as compared to normal skin and that in both conditions the number of tryptase-positive MC was significantly higher as compared to the number of cathepsin-G-positive MC.
In conclusion, in this study, for the first time we have demonstrated the presence of MC with immunoreactivity to cathepsin-G in human cutaneous mastocytosis, as well as the co-localization of tryptase and cathepsin-G in MC secretory granules.
The aim of our retrospective study was to evaluate the association of miR-126-3p, miR-126-5p and miR-664-3p tumour expression levels with outcomes of patients with metastatic colorectal cancer treated with bevacizumab.
In the present study, we investigated the role of miR-126-5p and Bcl2l2 in cervical cancer cells.
First, miR-126-5p expression was aberrantly downregulated in human cervical cancer tumor tissues in comparison with normal tissues, as evaluated by RT-PCR.
Consistently, the levels of miR-126-5p were also significantly reduced in cervical cancer cell lines when compared to normal cervical epithelial cells.
Flow cytometric analysis showed that the rate of apoptosis of cervical cancer cells was significantly increased by miR-126-5p overexpression but inhibited by miR-126-5p inhibitor.
A similar change pattern was observed in the expression of apoptosis-regulated protein caspase 3 in cervical cancer cells transfected with miR-126-5p mimic or inhibitor.
By bioinformatic prediction with online databases and verification using luciferase reporter assay, we then identified that Bcl2l2 is a direct target of miR-126-5p in cervical cancer cells.
The expression of Bcl2l2 was strongly downregulated by the miR-126-5p mimic but upregulated by the miR-126-5p inhibitor in cervical cancer cells, and Bcl2l2 expression was significantly increased in human cervical cancer tumor tissues, which was negatively correlated with miR-126-5p levels.
Furthermore, we confirmed that the rate of apoptosis was significantly increased by Bcl2l2 silencing in cervical cancer cells, which was not affected by the miR-126-5p inhibitor.
In summary, miR-126-5p plays an inhibitory role in human cervical cancer progression, regulating the apoptosis of cancer cells via directly targeting Bcl2l2.
Patients with miR-126*low myelodysplastic syndrome had significantly lower response rates (P = 0.04) and higher relapse rates (P = 0.03), as well as shorter progression-free (PFS; P = 0.004) and overall survival (OS; P = 0.004).
In the present study, the relationship between miR-126-5p/3p expression levels and overall survival in 109 patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) who received intensive therapy were evaluated.
The presence of XBP-1s, the active form of XBP-1, after administration of anti-Ig to Akata Burkitt's lymphoma cells is consistent with a role for this factor in reactivation of the EBV lytic cycle, although signalling through MEF2D was quantitatively much more significant in activation of Zp.
As expected, markers of neuronal differentiation such as anti-apoptotic protein B-cell lymphoma 2 (BCL2), myocyte enhancer factor-2D (MEF2D) and zipper protein kinase (MAP3K12; aka ZPK/MUK/DLK) were each up-regulated in response to differentiation.
The decrease in T-Shc and T1 were less obvious in mucinous adenocarcinoma and not observed in serous or endometrioid adenocarcinoma.
Overexpression of the signalling adaptor protein ShcD in melanoma was found to be a prerequisite for melanoma migration and invasion.
We have further demonstrated that ShcD accumulates in the nucleus upon hydrogen peroxide treatment in FLAG-ShcD expressing HEK293 cells, as well as 518.A2 melanoma cells.
We suggest that ShcD nuclear translocation might provide melanoma cells with a mechanism that enables them to resist DNA damage due to oxidative stress.
Rai like protein (RaLP) is a newly identified Src homology 2 domain containing (Shc) family member selectively expressed during the transition to metastatic melanoma and thus is a potential melanoma-specific drugable target.
Mutations in ABHD5 gene are associated with the onset of Chanarin-Dorfman syndrome (CDS), a rare autosomal recessive lipid storage disorder, characterized by non-bullous congenital ichthyosiform erythroderma (NCIE), hepatomegaly and liver steatosis.
It is an autosomal recessive disease caused by mutations in the ABHD5 gene.
Mutations of comparative gene identification 58 (CGI-58) in humans cause Chanarin-Dorfman syndrome, a rare autosomal recessive disease in which excess triacylglycerol (TAG) accumulates in multiple tissues.
The case histories of two children (aged two months) affected by myocarditis showing an atypical band of serum creatine kinase (EC 2.7.3.2; CK) in the CK isoenzyme electrophoretic pattern are reported.
The objective of this study was to evaluate the nephroprotective potential of resveratrol and piperine at same dose on cationic bovine serum albumin (cBSA) induced immune complex glomerulonephritis (ICGN) in BALB/c mice.
The object of the present study was to investigate the effects of VA, alone and in combination with methylprednisolone (MP), on cationic bovine serum albumin (cBSA induced immune-complex glomerulonephritis in female BALB/c mice.
Bovine serum albumin (BSA) glomerulonephritis is a type of immune complex glomerulonephritis that is characterized by a large number of leukocytes infiltrating the kidney.
The aim of this study is to show the results of the retrospective analysis (2010-2012) on hospital discharge records (HDRs) related to diseases potentially due to S. pneumoniae, using a selection of ICD9-CM codes.
The aim of this study is to show the results of the retrospective analysis (2010-2012) on hospital discharge records (HDRs) related to diseases potentially due to S. pneumoniae, using a selection of ICD9-CM codes.
GATA binding protein 3 (GATA3) and suppressors of cytokine signalling3 mRNA were differentially regulated in HDM and influenza-stimulated cultures+/-IFN-Beta.
In this article we review the current available evidence describing the effects of allopurinol in hypertension, kidney disease, and coronary heart disease, highlighting unresolved issues surrounding allopurinol use for uric acid lowering in individuals without gout.
Many epidemiological studies have evaluated associations of platelet glycoprotein receptor alpha2beta1 integrin (ITGA2) and glycoprotein IIIa (ITGB3) gene polymorphisms with diabetic retinopathy (DR), but the published data are inconclusive.
Genetic polymorphisms of the alpha2beta1 integrin and glycoprotein IIIa (GPIIIa) have been associated with myocardial infarction, stroke, and diabetic retinopathy.
Immunostaining procedures were used to seek for the expression of the following 30 membrane antigens related to the immune system, using dendriform cells obtained in conjunctival specimens from 80 normal subjects and 105 with chronic conjunctivitis: class II antigens HLADR and DQ, CD1a (T6) and CD5, which usually mark Langerhans cells, macrophage markers CD14, CD36 and CD63, various lymphocyte antigens (CD2, CD4 and CD8), receptor to interleukin 2 (CD25), adhesion molecules and integrins (CD11a, CD11b, CD11c, CD18, CD29, CD41, CD61), the selectin CD62, ICAM-1 (CD54), ICAM-3 (CD50) and ELAM-1, CD45RO, related to activation of immune cells, and its ligand CD22, receptors to immunoglobulins (CD23 and CD32) and complement (CD21), transferrin receptor CD71, tryptase and vimentin, were thus investigated.
In order to elucidate the involvement of adhesion mechanisms in the process of megakaryocyte-dependent fibroblast growth, we applied BSA-coupled polymers of glucose, galactose, fucose, mannose, and several lectins (AAA, LCA, LTA, UEA-I) to cocultures of CD61 -positive (CD61+)/MACS-enriched megakaryocytes and human bone marrow fibroblasts.
Complications included pyogenic granuloma (10 patients, 24.4%), exposure keratopathy (7 patients, 17.1%) lagophthalmos (5 patients, 12.2%), ectropion (6 patients, 14.6%), lateral canthal dystopia (2 cases, 4.9%), eyelid notch (2 cases, 4.9%) and trichiasis (4 cases, 9.8%).
Complications included eyelid margin notch (3 cases), persistent canthal dystopia (3 cases), trichiasis (2 cases), pyogenic granuloma (2 cases), eyelid margin nodule (1 case), lower eyelid elevation of 1 mm (1 case), and mild resolving medial lagophthalmos (1 case).
After operation slight entropion occurred in 8 cases, slight ectropion in 3 cases, lagophthalmos for 2 -- 3 mm in 7 cases, notch of the palpebral margin in 5 cases and thinness of the donor tarsal plates in 4 cases, but the functional and aesthetic results were normal.
We screened the exons of RAY1/ST7 and ST7OT1-3 for sequence variants in 90 unrelated autism probands and identified several rare variants, including a Ile361Val substitution.
Several signaling systems downstream of G-CSFR have been identified that are defective or hyperactivated in myeloid cells of patients with congenital neutropenia: severely reduced expression of myeloid-specific transcription factors LEF-1 and C/EBPAlfa, severely reduced expression and functions of HCLS1 protein, severely reduced expression of neutrophil elastase protein, dramatic compensatory up-regulation of the NAMPT/NAD(+)/SIRT pathway leading to continuous activation of emergency granulopoiesis via the transcription factor C/EBPBeta, and hyperactivation of STAT5 protein by tyrosine phosphorylation.
We observed spontaneous osteoclastogenesis with a significant increase in OC formation and bone resorbing activity in late-stage CKD and HD patients when compared with early-stage CKD patients and healthy donors, likely due to an increased expression of RANKL and LIGHT (homologous to Lymphotoxins exhibiting Inducible expression and competing with herpes simplex virus Glycoprotein D for herpes virus entry mediator [HVEM], a receptor expressed by T lymphocytes) in PBMCs.
Healthy individuals of African ancestry have neutropenia that has been linked with the variant rs2814778(G) of the gene encoding atypical chemokine receptor 1 (ACKR1).
Here we describe an unexpected fundamental role for ACKR1 in hematopoiesis and provide the mechanism that links its absence with neutropenia.
The absence of erythroid ACKR1 altered mouse hematopoiesis including stem and progenitor cells, which ultimately gave rise to phenotypically distinct neutrophils that readily left the circulation, causing neutropenia.
In vivo studies in Adult Dark Agouti (DA) rats with unilateral surgically-induced ocular hypertension (OHT) treated with either CoQ10/TPGS micelles or TPGS vehicle twice daily for three weeks were performed, following which retinal cell health was assessed in vivo using DARC (Detection of Apoptotic Retinal Cells) and post-mortem with Brn3a histological assessment on whole retinal mounts.
After correction for multiple testing, DARC polymorphism rs3027012 in 5'-UTR was associated with higher risk of low absolute phagocyte count (APC&lt;500 and &lt;1000 cells per microliter, P=0.001 and P&lt;0.0005, respectively) and hospitalization due to febrile neutropenia (P=0.002).
We examined the effects of PR and EZ on NPC1L1, ABCG5, and ABCG8 expression in human hepatoma HepG2 cells and the murine small intestine.
In addition, knockdown of epigenetic regulator UHRF1 (ubiquitin-like, containing PHD and RING finger domains 1) in RIP3-null cancer cells reduces the methylation level of the Rip3 promoter.
A previous study revealed that ubiquitin-like with PHD and RING finger domains 1 (UHRF1) promoted cell proliferation and was a potential biomarker in medulloblastoma (MB).
Three lncRNAs, sex determining region Y-box 2 overlapping transcript (SOX2-OT), NCBP2 antisense RNA 2 (NCBP2-AS2) and ubiquitin like with PHD and ring finger domains 1 (UHRF1), were predicted to be associated with lung cancer; RT-qPCR confirmed that SOX2-OT and NCBP2-AS2 were associated with lung cancer.
UHRF1 (ubiquitin-like, with PHD and RING finger domains 1) plays a crucial role in DNA methylation, chromatin remodeling and gene expression and is aberrantly upregulated in various types of human cancers.
UHRF1 (ubiquitin-like with PHD and RING finger domains 1) is a critical regulator for DNA methylation, and its frequent overexpression in human cancers has been associated with tumor-promoting effects.
Recessive mutations in ORC1, ORC4, ORC6, CDT1 or CDC6 of the preRC in human cause Meier-Gorlin syndrome (MGS) that is characterized by impaired post-natal growth, short stature and microcephaly.
Mutations in ORC1, ORC4, ORC6, CDT1, and CDC6, which encode proteins required for DNA replication origin licensing, cause Meier-Gorlin syndrome (MGS), a disorder conferring microcephaly, primordial dwarfism, underdeveloped ears, and skeletal abnormalities.
Significantly higher concentrations of HMGB1 were found in nasal secretions from patients with chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyp or allergic rhinitis compared with the control subjects.
Previous studies have shown that HMGB1 is elevated in the nasal lavage fluids (NLF) of children suffering from allergic rhinitis (AR) and is associated with the severity of this disease.
The major cystinosis mutation is a 57 kb deletion on human chromosome 17p13 that removes the majority of CTNS and the entire adjacent gene, CARKL/SHPK.
The most common mutation in the nephropathic cystinosis (CTNS) gene is a homozygous 57-kb deletion that also includes an adjacent gene carbohydrate kinase-like (CARKL).
Analysis of the resulting data revealed a number of interesting features about this genomic region, including the long-range organization of CTNS, insight about the breakpoints and intervening DNA associated with the common cystinosis-causing deletion, and structural information about five genes neighboring CTNS (human ortholog of rat vanilloid receptor subtype 1 gene, CARKL, TIP-1, P2X5, and HUMINAE).
In particular, sequence analysis detected the presence of a novel gene (CARKL) residing within the most common cystinosis-causing deletion.
Interestingly, both CTNS and CARKL are absent in nearly half of all cystinosis patients (i.e., those homozygous for the common deletion).
There is limited evidence regarding interactions between pulmonary (dys)function, posture, and mobility of the upper body quadrant in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
Background There is limited evidence regarding interactions between pulmonary (dys)function, posture, and mobility of the upper body quadrant in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
Recent progress in our understanding of the developmental regulation of this tissue, the differentiation pathways, recognition of pathogens and antimicrobial responses is now exploited to help understand how epithelial cell function and dysfunction contributes to the pathogenesis of a variety of inflammatory lung diseases.
Herein, advances in our knowledge of the biology of airway epithelium, as well as its role and (dys)function in asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary fibrosis and cystic fibrosis will be discussed.
Managing neurogenic dysphagia with effective protection of the airway passages and prompt treatment of aspiration pneumonias is necessary to prevent respiratory failure.
Multivariate analysis identified four independent risk factors for mortality in patients with severe sepsis and septic shock: three or more organ dysfunctions (OR, 3.212; 95% CI, 1.585-6.506; p&lt;0.001), acute respiratory failure (OR, 2.649 95% CI, 1.327-5.287; p=0.006), positive blood culture (OR, 2.708; 95% CI, 1.289-5.689; p=0.009) and chronic heart failure (OR, 2.112; 95% CI, 1.036-4.308; p=0.040).
Our results highlight the importance of three or more organ dys-functions, acute respiratory failure, positive blood culture and chronic heart failure as independent risk factors for mortality in the first 24 hours after admission in patients with severe sepsis and septic shock.
This review briefly touches on CF genetics as it applies to lung disease and will focus on the current hypotheses of CFTR (dys)function and its impact on pulmonary fluid homeostasis.
To investigate the expression of the CDH13 gene and BCR/ABL fusion gene in chronic myeloid leukemia(CML) patients at different stages and explore their relationship.
We performed genomewide screening for methylated CpG islands and identified 8 genes frequently methylated in leukemia cell lines and in patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML): NOR1, CDH13, p15, NPM2, OLIG2, PGR, HIN1, and SLC26A4.
Although defective progenitor-stromal adhesion is a well-recognized feature of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML), the role of CDH13 abnormalities has not been evaluated in this disease.
Recent work from our laboratory suggested pIgR may be upregulated in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC).
In this work we investigated the expression of the SERCA3-type calcium pump in choroid plexus epithelial cells grown in vitro, and in normal and hyperplastic choroid plexus tissue, in choroid plexus papillomas displaying various degrees of atypia, and in choroid plexus carcinoma by immunohistochemistry in situ.
Whereas normal choroid plexus epithelial cells express SERCA3 abundantly, SERCA3 expression is strongly decreased in papillomas, and is absent in choroid plexus carcinoma, while expression in hyperplastic epithelium is high, similarly to normal epithelium.
We hypothesized that mutations in AP2S1 and GNA11 are causative in Danish patients with suspected FHH and that these mutations are not found in patients with primary hyperparathyroidism (PHPT), which is the main differential diagnostic disorder.
Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia (FHH) is a genetically heterogeneous condition resembling primary hyperparathyroidism (PHPT) but not curable by surgery; FHH types 1, 2, and 3 are due to loss-of-function mutations of the CASR, GNA11, or AP2S1 genes, respectively.
The aim of this study was to analyse prevalence and pathogenicity of CaSR, GNA11 and AP2S1 mutations in patients with an FHH phenotype and to compare them with a sample of patients with primary hyperparathyroidism (PHPT) in order to identify the most useful laboratory parameter for a differential diagnosis.
Tripartite motif-containing protein 37 (TRIM37), a new member of the RING-B-box-coiled-coil (RBCC) subfamily of zinc finger proteins, was found to be involved in the development and progression of several cancers.
In the present work, we clearly demonstrate that HMGB1 secreted by cancer cells is N-glycosylated at Asn37, which facilitates monocytic (M)-MDSC differentiation from bone marrow via the p38/NFKB/Erk1/2 pathway and also contributes to conversion of monocytes into MDSC-like cells; HMGB1 blockade by a monoclonal antibody against the HMGB1 B box obviously reduced the accumulation of M-MDSC in tumor-bearing mice, delaying tumor growth and development; additionally, MDSC expansion and HMGB1 up-regulation were also found in breast cancer patients.
We examined a possible association between the COMT Val158Met polymorphism and conversion disorder in a study of 48 patients with conversion disorder and 48 control patients.
We conclude that the COMT Val158Met genotype is quite common in Turkey and that it is not a risk factor for conversion disorder in the Turkish population.
Factor VII (FVII) activating protease (FSAP) is a circulating serine protease that is likely to be involved in a number of disease conditions such as stroke, atherosclerosis, liver fibrosis, thrombosis and cancer.
With purpose to study content of alpha-defensins (1-3) and synthesis and liberation of other proteins and peptides by neutrophils the concentrations of alpha-defensins, lipoprotein (alpha), C-reactive protein, precursor of cerebral natriuretic peptide, coagulation factor VII and von Willebrand factor were determined in supernatants of leukocytal cultures in patients with exertional angina pectoris and atherosclerosis of lower extremities.
The frequency of HLA-DR4 was increased in patients with optic neuritis alone compared to controls and to patients with multiple sclerosis, but further studies are required to confirm this finding.
The MS profiling by PGC-LC also revealed several glycan structural isomers that corresponded to LacdiNAc-type (GalNAcBeta1-4GlcNAc) motifs that were unique to the serous ovarian cancers and that correlated with elevated gene expression of B4GALNT3 and B4GALNT4 in patients with serous cancer.
We previously showed that B4GALNT3 overexpression enhances colon cancer cell malignant phenotypes in vitro and in vivo.
However, the role of B4GALNT3 in cancer stemness remains unclear.
We found that B4GALNT3 expression was positively correlated with advanced stages and poor survival in colorectal cancer patients.
Knockdown of B4GALNT3 using small interfering (si) RNAs in colon cancer cell lines (HCT116, SW480, HCT15, and HT29 cells) decreased sphere formation and the expression of stem cell markers, OCT4 and NANOG.
Taken together, these data suggest B4GALNT3 regulates cancer stemness and the invasive properties of colon cancer cells through modifying EGFR glycosylation and signaling.
In this study, we investigated the expression and role of B4GALNT3 in human neuroblastoma (NB).
Detection rates were as follows: IL-7: NVG higher than POAG; IL-10: POAG lower than cataract or NVG; and GM-CSF: cataract higher than POAG or NVG.
Sixty-four vitreous samples (40 RVO, 24 controls with idiopathic floaters) were analyzed in this retrospective case series using LC/MS for LPAs 16:0, 18:0, 18:1, 20:4, and ELISA kits or Luminex technology for ATX, angiopoetin-1 (ANG-1), interleukin-6 (IL-6), interleukin-7 (IL-7), interleukin-8 (IL-8), monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1), pigment epithelium-derived factor (PEDF), and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF).
Poly I:C induces IL-7 production, early inflammatory responses, and characteristic pathologies of SS-like dacryoadenitis in non-autoimmune-prone C57BL/6 mice.
Diagnosis of AIDS-NHL was preceded by a significantly elevated frequency of activated/germinal center-like CD19CD10CD71CD86AID B cells (P = 0.0072), elevated serum prevalence of the TLR2 ligand, and significantly elevated B-cell TLR2 expression (P = 0.0015), positively correlating with the frequency of activated/germinal center-like B cells (rho = 0.7273, P = 0.0144).
TLR2-stimulated purified B cells exhibited the activated B-cell phenotype observed in HIV+ subjects before AIDS-NHL diagnosis.
These results indicate that an elevated fraction of B cells display an activated/germinal center phenotype in those HIV+ subjects who go on to develop AIDS-NHL and suggest that TLR2-mediated activation may play a role in HIV infection-associated B-cell activation, potentially contributing to the genesis of AIDS-NHL.
The regulatory role of AVP on the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis suggests potential uses for AVP receptor modulators in various CNS indications, including depression, anxiety and post-traumatic stress disorder.
When POLN was ectopically overexpressed in human cells, it specifically coimmunoprecipitated with the homologous recombination factors BRCA1 and FANCJ, but not with previously suggested interaction partners (HELQ and members of the Fanconi anemia core complex).
Moreover, we obtained evidence for physical and functional interaction of POLN with factors belonging to the Fanconi anemia pathway, a master regulator of cross-link repair.
The results indicate that the Pol n I component MV is an allergen for human beings as well as for mice, and useful as a diagnostic tool for chironomid allergy.
Prevalence of service receipt was highest among women in the highest family income category (&gt;400% of federal poverty level [FPL]) and among women with insurance coverage for each of the following: contraceptive services among women at risk for unintended pregnancy; medical services beyond advice to help achieve pregnancy; vaccinations (hepatitis B and human papillomavirus [HPV], ever; tetanus, past 10 years; influenza, past year); discussions with a health care professional about improving health before pregnancy and taking vitamins with folic acid; blood pressure and diabetes screening; discussions with a health care professional in the past year about diet, among those with obesity; discussions with a health care professional in the past year about smoking, among current smokers; Pap tests within the past 3 years; and mammograms within the past 2 years.
Herein we describe a new phenotype associated with a mutation in exon 11 of the LMNA gene: hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, atrioventricular block, severe dyslipidemia and diabetes.
Independent analysis of LMNA variants via the type 2 diabetes (T2D) Knowledge Portal showed that variant p.G602S associated significantly with type 2 diabetes (p = 0.02; odds ratio = 4.58), and was more frequent in African Americans (allele frequency 0.297%).
Lipodystrophy is a rare disorder characterized by the complete or partial loss of subcutaneous adipose tissue, insulin resistance, diabetes mellitus and hyperlipidemia.Proteinuric renal disease is a prevalent feature of generalized lipodystrophy but rare in familial partial lipodystrophy.Patients carrying the c.1045C &gt; T missense LMNA mutation (p.R349W) may present with familial partial lipodystrophy, proteinuric nephropathy, cardiomyopathy and atypical myopathy.
BAT 5'-deiodinase activity was unaffected by propylthiouracil (PTU) and was elevated in hypothyroid rats, whereas EPI 5'-deiodinase was totally inhibited by PTU and was depressed in hypothyroidism.
Here, we report a novel mutation in ERCC8 gene in a 16-year-old boy who suffers from poor weight gain, short stature, microcephaly, intellectual disability, and photosensitivity.
Cockayne syndrome is caused by biallelic ERCC8 (CSA) or ERCC6 (CSB) mutations and is characterized by growth restriction, microcephaly, developmental delay, and premature pathological aging.
This study included 54 beta-thalassemia major patients divided into 2 groups; group A consisted of 28 patients who have thrombocytosis secondary to a previous splenectomy and group B comprised of 26 patients who did not have a splenectomy with normal platelet count, as well as a control group of 30 healthy individuals.
A microarray analysis of the B-1 lymphocytes revealed that IL-10 deficiency is associated with down-regulation of the genes that code for claudin-10, a protein that is involved in cell-to-cell contact and that has been linked to lung adenocarcinoma.
Thus, our findings suggest that the axis IL-10/claudin-10 is a promising target for the development of therapeutic agents against aggressive melanoma.
To explore the expression distinction of the cell adhesion proteins claudin-10,-14,-17 and E-cadherin in the adjacent non-neoplastic tissues and gastric cancer tissues, 50 gastric cancer tissues and 50 samples of adjacent non-neoplastic tissues adjacent to the tumors were examined for expression of claudin-10,-14,-17 and E-cadherin by streptavidin-perosidase immunohistochemical staining method.
The positive expression rates of claudin-10 in gastric cancer tissues and adjacent non-neoplastic tissues were 24% and 72% respectively (P &lt; 0.01).
In contrast, the positive expression rates of claudin-14 in gastric cancer tissues and adjacent non-neoplastic tissues were 58% and 24% respectively (P = 0.015 &lt; 0.05) Thus in our study, the expression of E-cadherin, claudin-10, and claudin-17 was down-regulated in gastric cancer tissue while the expression of claudin-14 was up-regulated.
Our study reveals that the expression of E-cadherin, claudin-10, and claudin-17 were down-regulated in gastric cancer tissue while the expression of claudin-14 was up-regulated and correlation between claudins and E-cadherin expression with lymphatic metastasis were observed.
Four genes (MMP-2, c-fos, claudin 1 (CLDN1) and claudin 10(CLDN10)) were correlated with the results of microarray and real time RT-PCR analyses for the gene-expression data in samples from 41 patients with lung adenocarcinoma.
Immunohistochemical staining for these genes in samples from 81 cases of lung adenocarcinoma demonstrated the expressions of CLDN1 and CLDN10 were correlated with overall survival of patients with lung adenocarcinoma.
Overexpression of CLDN1 and CLDN10 indicates a favorable prognosis for overall survival in some patients with lung adenocarcinoma.
Furthermore, circadian regulation of Gnaz was disturbed in the db/db mouse, a model of diabetic retinopathy.
The highest rates of somatic, non-synonymous mutations were found in GNG10 and GNAZ, neither of which has been previously reported to be mutated in melanoma.
Various other protein products of genes associated with bipolar disorder either bind to or are affected by phosphatidyl-inositol phosphate products of this pathway (ADBRK2, HIP1R, KCNQ2, RGS4, WFS1), are associated with its constituent elements (BCR, DUSP6, FAT, GNAZ) or are downstream targets of this signalling cascade (DPYSL2, DRD3, GAD1, G6PD, GCH1, KCNQ2, NOS3, SLC6A3, SLC6A4, SST, TH, TIMELESS).
In a recent study we found that the risk for unilateral retinoblastoma in offspring is 4 fold higher in women that are homozygotes for the 19 bp deletion in the DHFR gene and took folic acid supplement during pregnancy.
Retinoblastoma protein (pRb) was highly phosphorylated but p107 was upregulated, and the expression of E2f target genes was dysregulated as shown by upregulation of Cdc6 but downregulation of cyclin E, dihydrofolate reductase (dhfr), Cdc25a and B-Myb in chondrocytes of K6(H)/D1(H) mice.
The authors used a case-control study design to examine the association between retinoblastoma risk and maternal variations in the folate-metabolizing genes methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) (a cytosine-to-thymine substitution at nucleotide 677 [MTHFR677C-&gt;T]; reference single nucleotide polymorphism rs1801133) and dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) (a 19-base-pair deletion of intron 1a [DHFR19bpdel]; rs70991108).
The risk of having a child with unilateral retinoblastoma was associated with maternal homozygosity for DHFR19bpdel (odds ratio, 3.78; 95% confidence interval, 1.89-7.55; P = .0002), even after controlling for the child's DHFR19bpdel genotype (odds ratio, 2.81; 95% confidence interval, 1.32-5.99; P = .0073).
Maternal homozygosity for a polymorphism in the DHFR gene necessary for converting synthetic folic acid into biologic folate was associated with an increased risk for retinoblastoma.
To explore the role of Major Vault Protein (MVP) in oral cavity squamous cell carcinoma patients.
Molecular analysis of the GYS2 gene was not feasible, but this particular gene was included in the panel of hypoglycemia of whole exome sequencing (WES) which was at our disposal.
To understand the frequency of GSD0 in patients presenting with ketotic hypoglycaemia and to report a novel mutation in the GYS2 gene.
The GYS2 gene was sequenced in 50 patients diagnosed with ketotic hypoglycaemia.
Sequencing of the GYS2 gene is more likely to be positive in patients with fasting ketotic hypoglycaemia and concomitant postprandial hyperglycaemia with hyperlactataemia.
Biochemical evaluation as well as direct sequencing of exons and exon-intron boundary regions of the GYS2 gene were performed in a patient presenting fasting hypoglycemia and postprandial hyperglycemia and her parents.
A 7 year-old boy presenting with growth retardation, fasting hypoglycemia and ketoacidosis was diagnosed as having both idiopathic growth hormone (GH) deficiency and hepatic glycogen synthase (GS) deficiency caused by a homozygous mutation in exon 5 of the liver glycogen synthase gene (GYS-2).
GPB dosed at 6 mL BID lowered fasting ammonia levels in cirrhotic patients with HE as compared with baseline, was better tolerated than 9 mL BID, and is appropriate for further evaluation in patients with cirrhosis and episodic HE.
GPB reduced HE events as well as ammonia in patients with cirrhosis and HE and its safety profile was similar to placebo.
In vitro and clinical studies have been performed to assess GPB digestion, safety, and pharmacology in healthy adults and individuals with cirrhosis.
GPB exhibits delayed release characteristics, presumably reflecting gradual PBA release by pancreatic lipases, and is well tolerated in adults with cirrhosis, suggesting that further clinical testing for HE is warranted.
However, the role of S1PR1 in the progression of human acute myeloid leukemia (AML) remains to be fully elucidated.
Using overexpression and RNA interference knockdown assays, it was shown that the expression of S1PR1 in several human myeloid leukemia cell lines contributed to the suppression of cell apoptosis and promotion of cell proliferation.
Circulating chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) cells display an abnormal increase in the surface levels of the homing receptors CCR7 and CXCR4 concomitant with low S1P receptor 1 (S1P1) expression.
Previous work in our laboratory identified keratin 17 (K17) as a specific and sensitive biomarker for high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesions and cervical squamous cell carcinoma (SCC).
In this study, we show that high expression of keratin-17 (K17) predicts poor outcome in patients with cervical cancer, at early or late stages of disease, surpassing in accuracy either tumor staging or loss of p27(KIP1) as a negative prognostic marker in this setting.
In summary, both KRT4 and KRT17 expressions are related to the histopathology of the cervical squamous mucosa; KRT17 is highly overexpressed in immature squamous metaplasia, in HSIL, and in squamous cell carcinoma and the level of KRT17 in squamous cell carcinoma may help to identify patients who are at greatest risk for cervical cancer mortality.
P2X4 receptors in microglia are up-regulated in epilepsy and in neuropathic pain; that is to say, their total and/or PM expression levels increase.
Expression of several members of the family including P2X2, P2X4, and P2X7 receptors has been reported to be altered in the hippocampus following status epilepticus.
Recent work also found altered neuronal injury and inflammation after status epilepticus in mice lacking the P2X4 receptor.
In this study, we investigated the potential involvement of P2X4R in microglial functions in a model of kainate (KA)-induced status epilepticus (SE).
Here we show that, in the seizure-sensitive (SS) gerbil hippocampus, a recognized genetic epilepsy model, the expressions of both P2X2 and P2X4 receptors are markedly decreased as compared with that in the seizure-resistant (SR) gerbil.
In addition to pathogen recognition, DCIR has been shown to be pivotal in preventing autoimmune disease by controlling dendritic cell proliferation.
This study was aimed to further investigate whether DCIR polymorphisms are novel susceptibility factors for other autoimmune diseases, i.e.
Tubulointerstitial nephritis and uveitis syndrome, HLA-B27-associated uveitis, inflammatory bowel disease, and Kawasaki disease each made up fewer than 5% of diagnoses.
Stromal tissue was isolated from epithelial cells with laser capture microdissection (LCMD) and analyzed by cDNA array for the expression of TGFalpha, TGF-beta1, HGF, PDGF-alpha, IGFII, bFGF, aFGF, VEGFC, and VEGF.
Here, we demonstrate that Inositol Polyphosphate-5-Phosphatase F (INPP5F), one of the polyphosphoinositide phosphatases, is differentially expressed in GSCs from glioma patients, and is identified as an inhibitor of STAT3 signaling via interaction with STAT3 and inhibition of its phosphorylation.
In addition, loss of INPP5F gene in gliomas is significantly correlated with lower overall patient survivals.
These findings suggest that INPP5F is a potential tumor suppressor in gliomas via inhibition of STAT3 pathway, and that deregulation of INPP5F may lead to contribution to gliomagenesis.
The patient and his identical twin show a retinal dystrophy that, based on clinical appearance, visual fields, amd electrophysiology, is most likely autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa.
Although Gln supplementation had no effect on the loss of the tight junction protein occludin, the increased portal endotoxin and fasting glucose concentrations found in WSD-fed mice, markers of liver damage (e.g., nonalcoholic fatty liver disease activity score and number of neutrophils in the liver) were significantly lower in the WSD+Gln group than in the WSD group (~47% and ~60% less, respectively; P &lt; 0.05).
The purpose of this Evidence-Based Practice (EBP) paper is to answer PICOT questions by a review the effectiveness of chronotherapeutics interventions on depressive symptoms with depression and the depressive episode in the course of bipolar disorder.
We evaluated whether post-bronchiolitis asthma was associated with polymorphisms in the TLR3 rs3775291, TLR4 rs4986790, TLR7 rs179008, TLR8 rs2407992, TLR9 rs187084, and TLR10 rs4129009 genes.
There were no significant associations between TLR3, TLR4, TLR8, or TLR9 polymorphisms and post-bronchiolitis asthma.
Significant associations with SAFS compared with atopic asthma included Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3) (p = .009), TLR9 (p = .025), C-type lectin domain family seven member A (dectin-1) (p = .043), interleukin-10 (IL-10) (p = .0010), mannose-binding lectin (MBL2) (p = .007), CC-chemokine ligand 2 (CCL2) (2 SNPs, p = .025 and .041), CCL17 (p = .002), plasminogen (p = .049) and adenosine A2a receptor (p = .024).
Asthmatics had significantly lower circulating HPC expressing TLR-2 and TLR-9 with a similar trend for TLR-4.
The endosomal TLRs have been shown to be associated with the induction of asthmatic inflammation (TLR3), and with disease exacerbations (TLR7, TLR8 and TLR9).
A defect in the P-protein component of the glycine cleavage system has been the most frequent abnormality found in patients with glycine encephalopathy (NKH).
Soluble tumor necrosis factor receptor 1 (sTNF-R1), interleukin-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1Ra), von Willebrand factor (VWF), and osteoprotegerin (OPG) were measured in schizophrenia (n = 69) and affective (n = 55) spectrum patients at baseline and at one-year follow-up, and compared to healthy controls (HC) (n = 92) with analysis of covariance.
Serum sTNFR1 was significantly higher in patients with acute-stage schizophrenia compared to matched controls while no significant group differences were observed for the other markers.
Plasma levels of soluble tumor necrosis factor receptor 1 (sTNF-R1), interleukin 1 receptor antagonist (IL-1Ra), osteoprotegerin (OPG), and von Willebrand factor (vWf) were measured in patients (n=992) with schizophrenia spectrum (SCZ, n=584), schizoaffective disorder (SA, n=93), affective spectrum disorders (AFF, n=315), and healthy controls (HC, n=638).
The low-molecular-weight fraction of 5% human serum albumin (LMWF-5A) is being developed to treat the signs and symptoms of severe osteoarthritis of the knee.
MIS includes 10 components: dry weight changes, dietary intake, functional capacity, comorbidity, muscle wasting and loss of subcutaneous fat as well as body mass index (BMI), serum albumin level and total iron binding capacity (TIBC).
This study suggests that consecutive PNC contributed to the improvement of the protein intake, serum levels of albumin, cholesterol and to the delay of muscle wasting, which could also have a positive impact on the nutritional status, particularly in malnourished patients receiving HD treatment.
GCs = glucocorticoids; HDG = high-dose glucocorticoids; A1C = Hemoglobin A1C; GA = Glycated Albumin; FBG = fasting blood glucose; IG = interstitial glucose; BG = blood glucose; GIH = Glucocorticoids-induced hyperglycemia; HOMA-IR = Homeostasis Model Assessment-Insulin Resistance; CGMS = continuous glucose monitoring system; AUC = the area under the curve; MODD = absolute means of daily differences; LAGE = the largest amplitude of glycemic excursions; BMI = body mass index; DM = diabetes mellitus; SLE = systemic lupus erythematosus; IQR = interquartile range; HR = hazard ratio; PUMCH = Peking Union Medical College Hospital.
Objective To evaluate the presence and localization of folate receptor expressing macrophages in the rat groove model of osteoarthritis and determine the suitability of a new folate conjugate with albumin-binding entity (cm09) for in vivo SPECT (single-photon emission computed tomography) analysis.
Results In vivo SPECT/CT imaging of the new folate conjugate (cm09) was as useful as a folate conjugate without albumin-binding entity in the groove model of osteoarthritis with less renal accumulation.
However, the effects of agonistic anti-4-1BB Abs have not been examined in an experimental mouse model of psoriasis.
Therefore, we investigated the protective effects of agonistic anti-4-1BB Abs, using imiquimod (IMQ)-induced psoriasis-like dermatitis in mice, a condition histologically and clinically similar to human psoriasis.
We found that administration of agonistic anti-4-1BB Abs (10mg/kg) significantly alleviated the severity of IMQ-induced psoriasis-like skin inflammation in mice, with reduced histologic symptoms, including inflammatory infiltration, parakeratosis, and hyperkeratosis.
Taken together, our data provide evidence that agonistic anti-4-1BB Abs possesses immunosuppressive properties in IMQ-induced psoriasis-like skin inflammation, providing insight into the immunomodulatory effect of agonistic anti-4-1BB Abs for psoriasis immunotherapy.
Among identified psoriasis risk variants, three were more strongly associated with PsC than PsA (rs12189871 near HLA-C, p = 5.0 x 10(-19); rs4908742 near TNFRSF9, p = 0.00020; rs10888503 near LCE3A, p = 0.0014), and two were more strongly associated with PsA than PsC (rs12044149 near IL23R, p = 0.00018; rs9321623 near TNFAIP3, p = 0.00022).
Interatrial electromechanical delay (IA-EMD) and intra-left atrial electromechanical delay (ILA-EMD) were significantly longer in the psoriasis group compared with controls.
To investigate the expression of the peripheral blood retinoid-related orphan receptor gamma t (RORgamma t) and 4-1BB/4-1BBL mRNA in oral lichen planus (OLP) patients.
Blood and tissue eosinophils from patients with IgE-mediated allergic responses (atopic dermatitis, extrinsic asthma) express CD137.
Proteomic analysis revealed 14 statistically significant differentially expressed proteins, with nine showing increased expression (PDIA3, VIM/HEXA, SELENBP1, ENO1, CAPZA1, ERP29, TPI1, PARK7, and FABP3) and five showing decreased expression (EIF2S, PSMA3, RPSA, TUBB, and TUBA1B) in uveal melanomas that subsequently metastasized compared with those that did not.
Among these, 14 genes (FTL, K-ALPHA1, LDHA, RPL4, ENO1, ANXA2, RPL9, RPL10, RPL13A, GNB2L1, AMBP, GC, A1BG, and SERPINC1), in addition to previously well-known liver cancer related genes, were confirmed to be differentially expressed in seven liver cancer cell lines and 17 HCC tissues by semi-quantitative RT-PCR.
Expression profiles of the 9 genes ACTB, ALAS1, G6PD, GAPD, HMBS, HPRT1, K-ALPHA-1, SDHA and TBP were established in matched malignant and nonmalignant tissue specimens from 14 patients with bladder cancer.
The use of HPRT1 alone as a reference gene shown in our study was sufficient, but the normalization factors generated from two (HRPT1, ALAS1) or all three genes (HRPT1, ALAS1, K-ALPHA-1) should be considered for an improved reliability of normalization in gene profiling studies of prostate cancer.
We show that glucose clearance rates are affected in both children with marasmus as well as kwashiorkor, which correlate with plasma albumin concentrations.
Although marasmus is characterized by clinical wasting, kwashiorkor is associated with peripheral edema, oxidative stress, hypoalbuminemia, and hypoglycemia.
Total proteins, albumin and transferrin were all significantly lower in children with edema than in those with marasmus.
In this condition, 8CR inhibited edema and myonecrosis induced by the sPLA2 activity of Crotalus durissus terrificus in a dose-dependent manner by decreasing interleukin-1Beta (IL-1Beta), tumor necrosis factor Alfa (TNF-Alfa), prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), and lipid peroxidation.
In addition, it was shown that Crotalus durissus terrificus sPLA2 increases cell oxidative stress during edema and myonecrosis, and the antioxidant properties of the polyphenolic compound may be significant in mitigating the pharmacological effect induced by sPLA2 and other snake venom toxins.
Moreover, 5CQA significantly decreased the enzymatic activity and the oedema and myonecrosis induced by native sPLA2.
This flavonoid was able to decrease enzymatic activity and some pharmacological effects, such as myonecrosis, platelet aggregation, and neurotoxic activity caused by sPLA2, however, the inflammatory effect was not affected by naringin.
Under the conditions tested, we observed that both Boc-5 and Boc-10 strongly decreased edema, myonecrosis, and neurotoxicity induced by native sPLA2.
Incubation with pertussis toxin prior to the addition of either sPLA2 or LPA only showed abrogation of the response to LPA, thus suggesting the involvement of pertussis-sensitive Gi-proteins in the case of LPA.
In contrast, all of the four classical CMNs tested were negative, as were cases of Wilms' tumor and clear cell sarcoma of the kidney.
The aspirates were from 16 cases of classical Wilms' tumor (WT), one anaplastic WT, 2 clear cell sarcomas of the kidney (CCSK), 2 malignant rhabdoid tumors of the kidney (MRTK) and 6 congenital mesoblastic nephromas (CMNs).
Archival tissue from 38 patients with superficial smooth muscle cell and so-called fibrohistiocytic tumors (8 benign fibrous histiocytomas (BFHs), 6 dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans (DFPT), 9 malignant fibrous histiocytomas (MFHs), 9 leiomyomas (LMs) and 6 leiomyosarcomas (LMSs)) were immunostained with antibodies against SMA, HCD, CALP, PLAP and HPL.
In cell culture, d12.CALP at low multiplicity of infection (0.001 plaque-forming unit/cell) selectively killed calponin-positive human synovial sarcoma, leiomyosarcoma, and osteosarcoma cells.
To investigate the possible role of beta-defensins in gingival health and periodontal disease, we examined the effect of several stimuli on the expression of interleukin-8 (IL-8), human beta-defensin-1, -2, -3, and -4 (hBD) in primary human diseased gingival epithelial (HGE) cell cultures from periodontitis patients by quantitative TaqMan reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).
Human gingival epithelial cells (HGE) express two antimicrobial peptides of the beta-defensin family, human beta-defensin 1 (hBD-1) and hBD-2, as well as cytokines and chemokines that contribute to innate immunity.
SSKcnj16-/- rats exhibited hypokalemia and reduced blood pressure, and when fed a high-salt diet (4% NaCl), experienced 100% mortality within a few days triggered by salt wasting and severe hypokalemia.
Hence, patients with HNF1Beta mutations may have reduced Kir5.1 activity in the kidney, resulting in hypokalemia and hypomagnesemia.
The Kir5.1(-/-) mice displayed hypokalemic, hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis with hypercalciuria.
In conclusion, disruption of Kcnj16 induces a severe renal phenotype that, apart from hypokalemia, is the opposite of the phenotype seen in SeSAME/EAST syndrome.
We found that Kir5.1(-/-) mice presented with persistent metabolic acidosis and a clear respiratory phenotype.
Despite metabolic acidosis, ventilation at rest and in hyperoxic hypercapnia were similar in wild-type and Kir5.1(-/-) mice.
We suggest that this compensatory modulation of the peripheral chemosensory inputs develops in Kir5.1(-/-) mice in order to counteract the effect of continuing metabolic acidosis on the activity of the peripheral chemoreceptors.
In this study, CYP2E1*5B, CYP2E1*6, CYP2E1*7B, GSTO1 (A140D), and TP53 (Arg72Pro) polymorphisms and response to platinum-based chemotherapy and survival in 137 advanced stage NSCLC patients were investigated.
GSTO1-1 expression pattern has not been studied in transitional cell carcinoma (TCC), as yet.
Increased GSTO1-1 expression might contribute to TCC development and/or progression supporting the notion that GSTO1-1 may be a promising novel cancer target.
Glutathione S-transferase omega 1 (GSTO1) is an atypical GST isoform that is overexpressed in several cancers and has been implicated in drug resistance.
Here we show that silencing of GSTO1 with siRNA significantly impairs cancer cell viability, validating GSTO1 as a potential new target in oncology.
These potent GSTO1 inhibitors suppress cancer cell growth, enhance the cytotoxic effects of cisplatin and inhibit tumour growth in colon cancer models as single agent.
Our findings demonstrate the therapeutic utility of GSTO1 inhibitors as anticancer agents and identify the novel cellular pathways under GSTO1 regulation in colorectal cancer.
To explore the relationship between angiogenin-1/2 (Ang-1/2) and clinical parameters of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), and to assess the value of Ang-1/2 in predicting the prognosis of patients with IPF.
Preterm infants exposed to oxygen and mechanical ventilation are at risk for bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD), a multifactorial chronic lung disorder characterized by arrested alveolar development and nonsprouting, dysmorphic microvascular angiogenesis.
Many genes previously known to be affected by BPA and involved in obesity, hypertension, or heart disease were altered following these treatments, and AP-1, EGR1, and EGFR were key hubs affected by BPA and/or overfeeding.
Using immunohistochemistry, we studied Egr-1 expression specifically in a wide morphologic spectrum of pulmonary arteries in the lung tissue of 72 patients with different forms and stages of PAH, specifically idiopathic PAH (n = 18), advanced-stage congenital heart disease-associated PAH (PAH-CHD) (n = 21), early-stage PAH-CHD (n = 19) and non-neointimal hypoxic pulmonary hypertension (PH) (n = 4), and controls (n = 10).
Parkin substrates include two septins; SEPT4/CDCrel-2 which coaggregates with Alfa-synuclein as Lewy bodies in Parkinson's disease, and its closest homolog SEPT5/CDCrel-1/PNUTL1 whose overload with viral vector can rapidly eliminate dopamine neurons in rats.
After validation by Western blot and quantitative real-time PCR, the expressions of three proteins related to neurodegenerative disease, septin 5, Alfa-internexin, and Alfa-synuclein, were identified to be altered by MCLR exposure.
Interestingly, Septin 5, one of the genes isolated from HPAI H5N1-infected brain tissues has been reported to participate in the pathogenic process of Parkinson's disease.
A previous study successfully developed and validated a self-report BPD measure, the Minnesota Borderline Personality Disorder Scale (MBPD).
A previous study successfully developed and validated a BPD measure embedded within a normal trait measure, the Minnesota Borderline Personality Disorder Scale (MBPD).
This study was to investigate HSP70 expression in the peripheral lung tissues of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients and in human bronchial epithelial cells (16-HBE) exposed to cigarette smoke extract (CSE).
Sequencing analysis of the endogenous E2F4 gene in a series of colorectal cancer cell lines showed that the microsatellite-unstable cell line SW48 exhibited a serine deletion in this gene.
In conclusion, our data demonstrate that cancer-associated E2F4 mutations enhance the capacity of colorectal cancer cells to grow without anchorage, thereby contributing to tumor progression.
The inverse immunohistochemical relationship between E2F1 and E2F4 indicates a possible mechanistic interlink in colorectal cancer.
In an attempt to identify the role of E2F-4 as a potential mediator of cell proliferation, differentiation, tumorigenesis, and apoptosis in colorectal mucosa comparing with that of E2F-1, the authors examine 20 patients with human colon cancer and their corresponding histologically healthy mucosa by using immunohistochemical methods, computerized quantitative image analysis, and immunoblot analysis.
Eighteen colorectal cancer (CRC) patients from 13 kindreds meeting the Amsterdam criteria for HNPCC were analyzed and compared to sporadic CRC patients with MSI-H. We detected mutations of E2F-4 at the same repeat sequence in HNPCC.
Although the implication of vascular endothelial growth factor, angiopoietin-2, and C-X-C motif chemokine 10 has been suggested, the pathogenesis of systemic capillary leak syndrome remains unclear.
Microvascular dysfunction under septic shock is related to: increased capillary permeability that manifests as a breakdown of the microvascular endothelial barrier (factors which may contribute to capillary leak syndrome include endogenous proinflammatory cytokines, angiopoietin 2, vascular endothelial growth factor); arteriolar hyporesponsiveness to vasoconstrictors and vasodilators, the loss of adrenergic sensitivity and tone of smooth muscle cells lining the arterioles; loss of the anti-adhesive function of endothelial surfaces; decreased density of perfused capillaries (due to several contributing factors: decreased deformability of erythrocytes and neutrophils; activation of the clotting cascade with fibrin deposition and the formation of microthrombi; dysfunction of vascular autoregulatory mechanisms by nitric oxide; enhanced functional arteriovenous shunting of the microcirculation).
Further investigations of AL-1 as a promising new agent for treatment and/or prevention of diabetes are warranted.
In established cardiac ATTR amyloidosis, T1 elevation was not as high as in AL amyloidosis (AL 1,130 +/- 68 ms; p = 0.01).
We previously reported that EphA5 receptor-ephrinA5 interactions within the ventromedial hypothalamus (VMH) influence counterregulatory hormone responses during acute hypoglycemia in nondiabetic rats.
In this study, we examined whether recurrent hypoglycemia alters the capacity of the ephrinA5 ligand to activate VMH EphA5 receptors, and if so, whether these changes could contribute to pathogenesis of defective glucose counterregulation in response to a standard hypoglycemic stimulus.
The expression of ephrinA5, but not EphA5 receptors within the VMH, was reduced by antecedent recurrent hypoglycemia.
Activation of VMH EphA5 receptors via targeted microinjection of ephrinA5-Fc before a hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemic clamp study caused a reduction in the glucose infusion rate in nondiabetic rats exposed to recurrent hypoglycemia.
These data suggest that changes in ephrinA5/EphA5 interactions and synaptic plasticity within the VMH, a key glucose-sensing region in the brain, may contribute to the impairment in glucagon secretion and counterregulatory responses caused by recurrent hypoglycemia.
Activation of Beta-cell EphA5 receptors by its ligand ephrinA5 from adjacent Beta-cells has been reported to decrease insulin secretion during hypoglycemia.
Given the similarities between islet and ventromedial hypothalamus (VMH) glucose sensing, we tested the hypothesis that the EphA5/ephrinA5 system might function within the VMH during hypoglycemia to stimulate counterregulatory hormone release as well.
Local stimulation of VMH EphA5 receptors by ephrinA5-Fc or ephrinA5 overexpression increased, whereas knockdown of VMH ephrinA5 reduced counterregulatory responses during hypoglycemia.
Overexpression of VMH ephrinA5 transiently increased local glutamate concentrations, whereas ephrinA5 knockdown produced profound suppression of VMH interstitial fluid glutamine concentrations in the basal state and during hypoglycemia.
Changes in ephrinA5/EphA5 interactions within the VMH, a key brain glucose-sensing region, act in concert with islets to restore glucose homeostasis during acute hypoglycemia, and its effect on counterregulation may be mediated by changes in glutamate/glutamine cycling.
Fractionation of dichloromethane (DCM) molecules with different chlorine isotopes by aerobic methylobacteria Methylobacterium dichloromethanicum DM4 and Albibacter nethylovorans DM10; cell-free extract of strain DM4; and transconjugant Methylobacterium evtorquens Al1/pME 8220, expressing the dcmA gene for DCM dehalogenase but unable to grow on DCM, was studied.
We also describe the first RCC with a DVL2-TFE3 gene fusion, in addition to an extrarenal pigmented PEComa with a NONO-TFE3 gene fusion.
Furthermore, among neoplasms with the SFPQ-TFE3, NONO-TFE3, DVL2-TFE3, and ASPL-TFE3 gene fusions, the RCCs are almost always PAX8 positive, cathepsin K negative by immunohistochemistry, whereas the mesenchymal counterparts (Xp11 translocation PEComas, melanotic Xp11 translocation renal cancers, and alveolar soft part sarcoma) are PAX8 negative, cathepsin K positive.
The compound was further tested in vitro for acetylation of histone H4 and other non-histone proteins, and in vivo in a colon carcinoma model, showing significant proapoptotic and antitumor activities.
As a proof-of-principle, we have identified cytochrome C and Histone H4 as two of the predominant protein species in the 3D colon carcinoma cultures.
Double 2-mm core tissue microarrays were made from 261 paraffin-embedded gastric adenocarcinoma samples and examined by immunohistochemistry for histone H3 lysine 9 (H3K9) acetylation and trimethylation, histone H4 lysine 16 acetylation, and histone H4 lysine 20 trimethylation.
This study aimed to investigate the expression of NOR1 in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) tissue and its relationship with prognosis.
Oxidored-nitro domain-containing protein 1 (NOR1) expression levels are greater in hepatitis, cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma samples compared with from normal liver samples.
In conclusion, these results indicate that NOR1 may be involved in the progression of HCC and thus may be a potential target for the treatment of liver cancer.
To date, several studies have revealed that gene mutations of the transporters are likely to be associated with some diseases; however, there are no data concerning the genetic polymorphism of the hOSCP1 gene in Japanese patients with non-viral liver carcinoma (LC).
The nitroreductase oxidored-nitro domain containing protein 1 (NOR1) gene may be involved in the chemical carcinogenesis of hepatic cancer and nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC).
Using cDNA microarrays and quantitative real-time PCR, we previously discovered that NOR1 increases the expression of growth factor receptor-bound protein 2 (Grb2) mRNA by 4.8-fold in the human hepatocellular carcinoma cell line HepG2.
In addition, expression of human NOR1 protein in different normal and cancerous human tissues was analyzed via search of the human RNA and protein databases; the data showed that although most malignant cells weakly stained or were negative for NOR1 expression, the liver cancer cells displayed moderate to strong expression of NOR1.
These data suggested that NOR1 might serve as a cancer/testis/brain antigen in cells, and that altered NOR1 expression in liver cancer may help us to elucidate the functions of NOR1 protein in liver carcinogenesis.
Significant allelic associations with SLE were detected in European Americans (EA) and African Americans (AA), which could be attributed to an intronic CFH SNP (rs6677604, in intron 11, P(meta) = 6.6x10(-8), OR = 1.18) and an intergenic SNP between CFHR1 and CFHR4 (rs16840639, P(meta) = 2.9x10(-7), OR = 1.17) rather than to previously identified disease-associated CFH exonic SNPs, including I62V, Y402H, A474A, and D936E.
Gastroschisis and omphalocele are the most common fetal abdominal wall defects (AWDs).
AWDs were identified through gastroschisis and omphalocele checkboxes from publicly available US Natality data (2006 to 2010).
The angiogenic proteins vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and prokineticin1 (PROK1) proteins are considered important in colorectal cancer, the relationship between their simultaneous expression and prognosis was investigated in the present study.
VEGF and PROK1 expression in 620 primary human colorectal cancer lesions was confirmed via immunohistochemical staining with anti-VEGF and anti-PROK1 antibodies, and the correlation between the expression of these 2 proteins and recurrence/prognosis were investigated.
The prognosis was poorer in colorectal cancers that expressed both PROK1 and VEGF relative to the cases that expressed only 1 protein, and the expression of both proteins was found to be an independent prognostic factor.
Two angiogenic growth factors, in particular, Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and Prokineticin1(PROK1), are considered to have an important role in hematogenous metastasis of colorectal cancer.
Accordingly, we report our findings on the importance of the anti-tumor efffect by inhibiting these two factors in human colorectal cancer.When the culture fluid of Colorectal cancer cell lines(DLD-1, HCT116, and LoVo) with high levels of VEGF/PROK1 expression was injected subcutaneously into mice, the culture fluid increased subcutaneous angiogenesis.
Also, tumor masses were produced in mice by subcutaneously embedding colorectal cancer cells with high levels VEGF/PROK1 expression.
When both anti-PROK1 and anti-VEGF antibodies were simultaneously applied, tumor formation and peritumoral angiogenesis were strongly suppressed, compared with when either anti-PROK1 antibody or anti-VEGF antibody was applied alone.Simultaneous targeting of both angiogenic growth factors (VEGF/PROK1) may prove more useful in colorectal cancer.
The current study established the anti-PROK1 monoclonal antibody (mAb) and examined the relationship between the expression of PROK1 protein and human colorectal cancer.
The expression of PROK1 protein was assessed in 620 resected sporadic colorectal cancer tissue samples by immunohistochemical staining with in-house-developed human PROK1 mAb to investigate the relationship of PROK1 expression to clinicopathologic factors, recurrence, and survival rate and to evaluate its prognostic significance.
The expression of PROK1 protein was detected in 36 % (223/620) of human primary colorectal cancer lesions but no in the healthy mucosa adjacent to the colorectal cancer lesions.
The expression of PROK1 protein was identified for the first time as a new prognostic factor in colorectal cancer.
Here we investigated how the anti-PROK1 monoclonal antibody (mAb; established by our department) would affect the high-PROK1-expressing colorectal cancer (CRC) cells in vitro and vivo.
PROK1 expression was not observed in healthy gastrointestinal mucosa, but was observed in the primary lesions in 23 out of 98 (31.6%) patients with colorectal cancer, 19 out of 55 (34.5%) patients with gastric cancer, and 5 of 10 (50%) patients with cancer of the small intestine.
Endocrine gland-derived vascular endothelial growth factor (EG-VEGF) has             recently been identified as one of the vascular endothelial growth factors, and             it is considered that the overexpression of EG-VEGF in colon cancer is related             to hepatic metastasis.
In this study, we report our recent novel findings of the             involvement of EG-VEGF in cell invasion of colon cancer cells.
Finally, the EG-VEGF receptor on the colon cancer cell membrane             was blocked by anti-PK-R1 and -PK-R2 antibodies to study whether cell invasion             ability would be altered.
In colon cancer cell lines where the expression of PK-R1             and 2 was confirmed, stimulation with EG-VEGF increased cell invasion a maximum             of ~3-5 times.
The study showed that the EG-VEGF             protein may act on MMP-2, -7 and -9 via PK-R2 to strengthen cell invasion ability             in colon cancer cell lines.
To study the implication of prokineticin 1 (PK1/EG-VEGF) and prokineticin 2 (PK2/Bv8) in hepatocellular carcinoma angiogenesis.
In this study, we investigated the expression of EG-VEGF in colorectal cancer, the relationship between its expression and clinicopathological factors, and the in vitro activity of EG-VEGF transfectants.
We determined expression levels of EG-VEGF in 113 advanced colorectal cancers resected in our hospital by quantitative PCR, and compared the expression levels and clinicopathological findings by multivariate analyses.
We speculate that, in colorectal cancers, the EG-VEGF gene functions as an important factor in angiogenesis in primary and metastatic lesions, and consider that it is useful as a novel prognostic factor.
The aim of the present study was to detect the correlation between the expression of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), angiopoietin 2 (Ang2), ephrinB2 and endocrine gland-derived vascular endothelial growth factor (EG-VEGF) and carcinogenesis or portal vein tumor thrombus (PVTT) formation in human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
A recent genome-wide association study (GWA) reported a significant association between single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) at the PCDH11X gene and late-onset Alzheimer's disease (LOAD).
Protocadherin 11X (Pcdh11X) has been suspected to be associated with Alzheimer's disease through participating in the metabolism of PP1Alfa and Beta-catenin or by altering the synaptic functions.
A recent genome-wide association study reported that a common single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP, rs5984894) in the gene encoding Pcdh11X was associated with susceptibility to late-onset Alzheimer's disease (LOAD) in Caucasians.
A recent genome-wide study on late-onset Alzheimer's disease identified a SNP (rs5984894) on Xq21.3 in the PCDH11X gene strongly associated with LOAD individuals of European descent from the United States.
By analyzing late-onset Alzheimer's disease (LOAD) in a genome-wide association study (313,504 SNPs, three series, 844 cases and 1,255 controls) and evaluating the 25 SNPs with the most significant allelic association in four additional series (1,547 cases and 1,209 controls), we identified a SNP (rs5984894) on Xq21.3 in PCDH11X that is strongly associated with LOAD in individuals of European descent from the United States.
In this study, we investigated the effect of Bim-1 siRNA on cell proliferation, cell cycle, cell apoptosis and migration of human esophageal carcinoma EC9706 cells, and explored its potential mechanisms.
In the present study, 4-mm samples of BIM (n=31) and CIM (n=9) were selected from esophagectomy specimens that had been resected for esophageal cancer.
Mechanistically, HCMV upregulated two specific cellular antiapoptotic proteins, myeloid leukemia sequence 1 (Mcl-1) and heat shock protein 27 (HSP27), to block the two proteolytic cleavages necessary for the formation of fully active caspase 3 and the subsequent initiation of apoptosis.
Heat shock protein 27 (HSP27) has been reported to promote the development of leukemia by protecting tumor cells from apoptosis through various mechanisms.
The present study investigated the effects of small hairpin (sh)RNA-mediated HSP27 knockdown on the anti-cancer effects of quercetin in U937 human leukemia cells.
Therefore, these findings collectively suggested that suppression of HSP27 expression amplified the anti-cancer effects of quercetin in U937 human leukemia cells, and that quercetin in combination with shHSP27 represents a promising therapeutic strategy for human leukemia.
Among these proteins, enolase, aldolase, HSP70 and sorcin were up-regulated in doxorubicin-resistant myelogenous leukemia cell line, whereas HSP27 was down-regulated.
However, the role of Hsp27 in the pathogenesis of pediatric acute             leukemia (AL) remains unknown.
In this study, we evaluated the expression levels             of Hsp27 in bone marrow samples from 94 children with newly diagnosed acute lymphoblastic             leukemia (ALL), acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and 5 leukemia cell lines.
Additionally,             we transfected a target-specific siRNA duplex against Hsp27 into leukemia cells,             and examined the chemosensitivity and cell apoptosis in the response to antitumor             drugs.
Hsp27 was abundantly expressed in newly diagnosed AML-M4/M5 bone marrow             mononuclear cells (BMMCs) and THP-1, OCI/AML-3 leukemia cell lines.
Knockdown of Hsp27 expression increased the chemosensitivity of             leukemia cells and the anticancer drug-induced apoptosis.
Therefore, Hsp27 may be exploited as a new target for enhancing the             efficacy of chemotherapeutic drugs against leukemia.
It was: xS-D-D-K-K-A-K-A-A-T-S-S-V-L-T-K-F-T-Q-N-Q-I-Q-E-M-K-E-A-F-T-M-I-D-Q-N-R -D-G-L- I-D-V-S-D-L-K-E-M-Y-S-N-L-G-T-A-P-Q-D-S-V-L-Q-A-M-V-K-E-A-P-Q-M-N-F-T-G- F-L-S-L- F-S-E-K-M-S-G-T-D-P-E-E-T-L-R-N-A-F-Q-M-F-D-S-D-N-T-G-Y-I-P-E-E-Y-M-K-D- L- L-E-N-M-G-D-N-F-S-K-D-E-V-R-Q-T-W-K-E-A-P-I-A-G-G-K-V-D-Y-N-A-F-V-S-K-I- K- G-K-E-Q-D-D-A.
Integrin alpha 8 (ITGA8) encodes the alpha 8 subunit of the integrin alpha8beta1 protein and has recently been suggested as a new candidate gene for Parkinson's disease, an age related neurodegenerative disease with unknown etiology.
Screen a Swedish case control material for rs7077361, a genetic variant in ITGA8, in order to investigate its possible implication in Parkinson's disease in Sweden.
Our results do not support the hypothesis of ITGA8 as a candidate gene for Parkinson's disease in Sweden.
CYFIP1 maps to the interval between proximal breakpoint 1 (BP1) and breakpoint 2 (BP2) of chromosomal 15q11-q13 deletions that are implicated in the Angelman (AS) and Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS).
We found copy number variants in PDE10A (phosphodiesterase 10A), CYFIP1 [cytoplasmic FMR1 (Fragile X mental retardation 1)-interacting protein 1], K(+) channel genes KCNE1 and KCNE2, the Down's syndrome critical region 1 gene RCAN1 (regulator of calcineurin 1), cell-recognition protein CHL1 (cell adhesion molecule with homology with L1CAM), the transcription factor SP4 (specificity protein 4) and histone deacetylase HDAC9, among others (see http://www.genes2cognition.org/SCZ-CNV).
We describe nine cases with a microdeletion at 15q11.2 between BP1-BP2, thus having a haploinsufficiency for TUBGCP5, NIPA1, NIPA2, and CYFIP1 without Prader-Willi/Angelman syndrome.
Altered expression of CYFIP1 is seen in other developmental disabilities, including 15q disorders, and haploinsufficiency of CYFIP1 in Type I PWS cases may be associated with age-related phenotypic effects.
Expression analysis of cultured human cells and brain tissues from PWS patients indicates that CYFIP1 and NIPA2 are biallelically expressed.
Four genes (NIPA1, NIPA2, CYFIP1, and GCP5) have been identified in the chromosomal region between breakpoints 1 and 2 and are implicated in compulsive behavior and lower intellectual ability observed in individuals with Prader-Willi syndrome with TI versus TII deletions.
Messenger RNA from NIPA1, NIPA2, CYFIP1, and GCP5 was reduced but detectable in the subjects with Prader-Willi syndrome with the TI deletion, supporting biallelic expression.
Therefore, we recruited 50 untreated house dust mite-sensitive allergic rhinitis patients and 29 non-atopic healthy individuals and performed comprehensive simultaneous flow cytometric analysis of mutual correlations between levels of CD14, CD16, CD163, CD206, CD124 (IL-4R), CD210 (IL-10R) and CD25, CD124, CD127 (IL-7R), CD210, ICOS expression on monocytes and CD4+ T cells, respectively.
We did not observe any statistically significant differences between healthy and diabetic children in mRNA expression for FoxP3, IL-7R (CD127), IL-8RA, IL-10RA, IL-12A, IL-2RA (CD25), IL-21, STAT1, STAT3, SOCS2, SOCS3, TGF-beta1-R1, TGF-beta-R2 and TBX-21 genes.
Expression of the Growth Hormone (GH)-stimulated gene Socs2 (Suppressor of Cytokine Signaling 2) is mediated by the transcription activator STAT5 (Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription 5) and the transcription repressor BCL6 (B-Cell Lymphoma 6).
Gene expression analysis revealed increased expression of MAPK1, AKT1, PRKCE, IL4R and DROSHA and decreased expression of CDKN1A/p21, SOCS2, CHEK1, RAD51, KLF4, BLIMP1 and IRF4 in follicular lymphoma.
miR-20a/b and miR-194 target CDKN1A and SOCS2 in follicular lymphoma, potentially contributing to tumor cell proliferation and survival.
Nuclear factors such as pregnane X receptor (PXR) and constitutive androstane receptor (CAR), as well as transporters and conjugation enzymes involved in the detoxification of lithocholic acid (LCA), also showed higher expression in SPF mice.
In this study, using transgenic mice bearing conditional expression of the activated constitutive androstane receptor (CAR), we demonstrate that activation of CAR is both necessary and sufficient to confer resistance to the hepatotoxicity of lithocholic acid (LCA).
These results support the conclusion that dental caries is highly affected by the activity of CA VI in saliva as well as by the salivary flow rate.
Eleven articles found a consistent association between salivary protein polymorphisms and risk of dental caries, for proteins related to antimicrobial activity (beta defensin 1 and lysozyme-like protein), pH control (carbonic anhydrase VI), and bacterial colonization/adhesion (lactotransferrin, mucin, and proline-rich protein Db).
The rs17032907 genetic variant and the haplotype (ACA) of CA VI may be associated with dental caries susceptibility.
The oral pathogenic bacterium involved in human dental caries formation Streptococcus mutans, encodes for two carbonic anhydrase (CA, EC 4.2.1.1) one belonging to the Alfa- and the other one to the Beta-class.
Streptococcus mutans, the oral pathogenic bacterium provoking dental caries formation, encodes for a Beta-class carbonic anhydrase (CA, EC 4.2.1.1), SmuCA.
We used mice lacking the CNTNAP2 gene, which has been implicated in autism, and achieved a temporally precise reduction in E:I balance in the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) either by optogenetically increasing the excitability of inhibitory parvalbumin (PV) neurons or decreasing the excitability of excitatory pyramidal neurons.
Post-mortem analyses have demonstrated a selective reduction in the expression of parvalbumin (PV) in GABAergic interneurons in the frontal rather than the sensory cortex of patients with neuropsychiatric disorders such as schizophrenia, autism spectrum disorders, and bipolar disorders.
Recent neuropathology studies in human brains indicate that several areas of the prefrontal cortex have decreased numbers of parvalbumin interneurons or decreased parvalbumin expression in Autism Spectrum disorders (ASD) [Hashemi, Ariza, Rogers, Noctor, &amp; Martinez-Cerdeno, 2017; Zikopoulos &amp; Barbas, ].
In view of the documented association between parvalbumin-expressing neurons and autism, the objective of the present study was to determine if parvalbumin gene expression is also altered in Purkinje neurons of the cerebellum.
Our hypothesis is that parvalbumin, a molecule that controls and coordinate many cellular brain functions, contributes to the excitatory/inhibitory imbalance in Autism.
We report that parvalbumin expression is depressed in Purkinje cells of the cerebellum in autism.
For children less than 32 weeks, FVL homozygosity may be associated with an increase in the risk of developing quadriplegia (OR 9.12, 95% CI 0.86-53.71).
In the myocardium activation of NFATc3 down-regulates the expression of voltage-gated K(+) (Kv) channels after myocardial infarction (MI).
Knockdown of NFAT4 suppresses mitochondrial fission and protects cardiomyocyte from apoptosis and myocardial infarction.
The expression pattern of WNT3A is consistent with BRG1 in colon cancer tissues and WNT3A expression was inhibited in BRG1 knockdown cells.
In this study, we demonstrate that BRG1 may contribute to colon cancer progression through upregulating WNT3A expression.
VM-positive colon cancer samples showed increased Wnt3a expression (p &lt; 0.001) and Beta-catenin nuclear expression (p &lt; 0.001) compared with the VM-negative samples.
In vitro, over-regulated Wnt3a expression in HT29 colon cancer cells promoted the capacity to form tube-like structures in the three-dimensional (3-D) culture together with increased expression of endothelial phenotype-associated proteins such as VEGFR2 and VE-cadherin.
However, the roles of Wnt3a, the representative canonical Wnt ligand, in EMT and colon cancer progression have not yet been fully explored.
The expression levels of Wnt3a and EMT-associated proteins (E-cadherin, vimentin, and Beta-catenin) were assessed by immunohistochemistry in human colon cancer tissues to evaluate the clinicopathological significance of Wnt3a, as well as the correlation between Wnt3a and EMT.
We then upregulated Wnt3a expression in HCT116 colon cancer cells, established a nude mouse xenograft model, detected the expression of EMT and Wnt/Beta-catenin signaling-associated proteins, and observed invasion and clone-initiating abilities.
In 203 human colon cancer tissue samples, Wnt3a protein overexpression was related to colon cancer histological differentiation (P = 0.004), clinical stage (P = 0.008), presence of metastasis and recurrence (P = 0.036), and survival time (P = 0.007) of colon cancer patients.
Wnt3a expression was associated with EMT and promoted colon cancer progression.
Disruption of 11-cis-RDHs causes a slowly developing cone dystrophy caused by inefficient cone pigment regeneration.
To evaluate the GH-releasing hormone (GH-RH)-induced response of GH in patients affected by hypothalamic amenorrhea.
The amenorrheic condition associated with reduced BMI changes the GH-RH--induced GH response in hypothalamic amenorrhea, supporting a GH and a IGF-I disregulation in weight-loss--related amenorrhea.
We report the case of a 17-year-old girl presenting short stature (height 149 cm, below the 3rd percentile), obesity (weight 83.5 kg, body mass index 37 kg/m2) and secondary amenorrhea, in whom endocrinological evaluation disclosed an absolute lack of GH responsiveness to both suprapituitary challenges and repetitive growth hormone releasing hormone administration together with failure of plasma gonadotropins and PRL, low under basal conditions, to rise in response to GnRH and insulin-hypoglycemia, respectively.
Common genes include Jagged 1 (Jag1), Tetraspanin 2 (Tspan2), neuroblastoma, suppression of tumourigenicity 1 (Nbl1) and N-myc downstream regulated gene 2 (Ndrg2).
While vincristine was effective against 1 out 4 neuroblastoma xenografts, TS-N-2, with 58.1% maximum inhibition rate, etoposide was assessed ineffective as a single agent in all of the 3 xenografts used.
The purpose of this study was to evaluate the correlation of somatostatin receptor-2 (SSTR2) expression with 68Ga-DOTA-TATE uptake and 177Lu-DOTA-TATE therapy in neuroblastoma (NB) xenograft models.
Neuroblastoma may be treated with molecular radiotherapy, 131I meta-Iodobenzylguanidine and 177Lu Lutetium DOTATATE, directed at distinct molecular targets: Noradrenaline Transporter Molecule (NAT) and Somatostatin Receptor (SSTR2), respectively.
Tissue bank samples of formalin fixed paraffin embedded neuroblastoma tissue from patients for whom clinical outcome data were available were sectioned and stained with haematoxylin and eosin, and monoclonal antibodies directed against NAT and SSTR2.
68Ga-DOTATATE PET/CT enables detection of meningioma tissue based on somatostatin receptor 2 expression.
Immunohistochemistry for the meningioma markers EMA and SSTR2A raised the possibility of intraosseous meningioma, as all 3 lesions were convincingly positive for epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) and 1 lesion was convincingly positive for the somatostatin receptor subtype 2A (SSTR2A); weak, questionable positivity for SSTR2 was present in the remaining 2 cases.
Somatostatine receptors subtype 2 (SSTR2) are regarded as a potential target in neuroblastoma (NB) for imaging and promising therapeutic approaches.
GaTATE PET was positive in a high proportion of patients with refractory neuroblastoma, correlating with SSTR 2 on IHC, with additional disease identified compared with MIBG imaging.
PET using the SSTR2 analog (68)Ga-DOTATATE has recently been introduced for imaging of meningiomas.
(68)Ga-DOTATATE uptake correlates with SSTR2 expression and offers high diagnostic accuracy to delineate meningioma from tumor-free tissue even in recurrent tumors after previous therapy.
We aimed to compare the frequency of perineurial marker expression in these two entities, and to determine whether somatostatin receptor 2 (SSTR2) and progesterone receptor (PR), both expressed frequently in meningiomas, are also expressed in perineuriomas.
All tumours were stained using five antibodies against antigens that are known to be expressed in perineuriomas or meningiomas: epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), claudin-1, GLUT-1 (glucose transporter-1), SSTR2, and PR.
Of the meningiomas, EMA was expressed in 59 of 61, claudin-1 in five of 63, GLUT-1 in 19 of 62, SSTR2 in 59 of 68, and PR in 44 of 62.
The SSTR2-positive/PR-positive phenotype was detected in 42 of 60 meningiomas, but in none of 20 perineuriomas.
SSTR2 and PR are highly sensitive and, in this context, specific meningioma markers.
We utilized inhibitors of cPLA2 alpha, COX-1/2 and 5-LO to determine the potential roles of these enzymes in development of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), an animal model of multiple sclerosis (MS).
This study aimed to better understand the role of miR-200a-3p and its correlation with HBx in HBV-induced hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
Further study suggested that lncRNA-PE downregulated miR-200a/b by repressing the primary transcript expression, enhanced ZEB1 expression, and promoted epithelial-mesenchymal transition of hepatocellular carcinoma cells.
All these data imply that lncRNA-PE might play an important role in hepatocellular carcinoma development via the miR-200a/b-ZEB1 pathway.
Herein, we found that hepatocellular carcinoma cells shed more microvesicles than normal hepatocytes and miR-200a were shown to inhibit the release of microvesicles in hepatocellular carcinoma cells.
Collectively, our findings indicate that miR-200a regulated the microvesicle biogenesis involved in the hepatocellular carcinoma progression.
Conclusions: These findings indicate that miR-200a regulates the proliferation, migration and invasion of HCC cells by targeting Foxa2, suggesting that miR-200a may function as a potential therapeutic molecular for the diagnosis and treatment of the liver cancer.
Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs)-activated by transforming growth factor beta (lncRNA-ATB) is known to be involved in the invasion of hepatocellular carcinoma by regulating target genes of miR-200a.
In this study, we determined that miR-200a was downregulated in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) tissues and cell lines, consistent with the results of our previous study.
Our data indicate that nine distinct genes associated with multiple sclerosis risk, Bach2, Il2ra, Irf8, Mertk, Odf3b, Plek, Rgs1, Slc30a7 and Thada, can be confirmed to be differentially regulated in pathogenic CD4(+) T cells.
Genetic polymorphisms within a single locus encoding the transcription factor BACH2 are associated with numerous autoimmune and allergic diseases including asthma, Crohn's disease, coeliac disease, vitiligo, multiple sclerosis and type 1 diabetes.
However, array-based copy number analysis and qPCR were used to detect a hemizygous deletion in the PACD linkage interval containing 4 genes encoding small leucine-rich proteoglycans (SLRPs): KERA, LUM, DCN, and EPYC.
The authors performed clinical evaluation of a previously unreported pedigree with PACD, light and electron microscopic examination of an excised corneal button, genomewide linkage analysis, fine mapping linkage and haplotype analysis, and screening of four candidate genes (KERA, LUM, DCN, and EPYC).
Emerging evidence indicates that elevated CD164 expression is associated with aggressive metastasis, advanced stages, and shorter overall survival in lung cancer.
However, no data are available regarding the clinical significance of CD164 expression in lung cancer.
Using tissue microarrays, we determine that CD164 expression is correlated with clinicopathological characteristics in human lung cancer.
Therefore, identification of CD164 as a cancer stem cell therapeutic marker may develop an effective therapy in patients with chemoresistant lung cancer.
Cluster of differentiation 164 (CD164), a sialomucin, has been demonstrated to be involved in the regulation of proliferation, apoptosis, adhesion and differentiation in multiple cancers.
However, the involvement of CD164 in human glioma proliferation and apoptosis remains unknown.
The aim of the present study was to investigate the expression and oncogenic function of CD164 in normal human astrocytes (NHA) and glioma cells in vitro and in vivo.
The results of the present study demonstrated that CD164 mRNA and protein levels were significantly increased in human glioma cell lines and tissue samples.
Knockdown of CD164 inhibited cell proliferation and promoted apoptosis of the U87 human glioma cell line in vitro and in vivo.
The results suggest that CD164 expression may have affected the proliferation and apoptosis of human glioma cells via the PTEN/phosphoinositide 3-kinase/AKT pathway, and may therefore present a potential target for the diagnosis and treatment of glioma.
We recently demonstrated the high expression of CD164 on CD4+ T cells from Sezary syndrome patients with a wide range of circulating tumor burdens.
Our results suggest that miR-124 function as a tumor suppressor miRNA and suppress tumor proliferation and aggression by directly targeting oncogenic CD164 signaling pathway in NSCLC.
In a cohort of patients with Sezary syndrome, CD164 expression on total CD4+ lymphocytes was significantly upregulated compared with healthy controls.
Increased expression of CD164 may be a promising diagnostic parameter and a potential target for a CD164-linked therapeutic approach in Sezary syndrome.
These results indicate that miR-219 suppresses the proliferation, migration and invasion of medulloblastoma cells by targeting CD164.
Despite the known engagement of the AFAP1-AS in several human diseases, its biological function in Hirschsprung disease (HSCR) remains elusive.
This prospective observational study included 47 patients (mean age 29 years, range 3-50) with different resistant generalized epilepsy syndromes: idiopathic generalized syndromes (IGE) 15 patients, (juvenile myoclonic epilepsy four, absence epilepsy four, myoclonic absence two, unclassified IGE five), progressive myoclonic epilepsy type 1 (PME1) four, severe myoclonic epilepsy of infancy (SMEI) three, borderline SMEI three, Lennox-Gastaut syndrome/secondary generalized epileptic encephalopties 23 patients.
The International League Against Epilepsy (ILAE) classification recognizes 2 forms of myoclonic epilepsy with a good prognosis: benign myoclonic epilepsy of infancy (BMEI) and juvenile myoclonic epilepsy (JME); recent studies confirm the efficacy of levetiracetam (LEV) in treating idiopathic generalized epilepsies (IGE) in patients with myoclonic seizures.
We evaluated 35 patients (21 female, mean age 24.7 years) with different types of generalised epilepsies (juvenile myoclonic epilepsy (JME), severe myoclonic epilepsy of infancy (SMEI), Lennox-Gastaut syndrome (LGS), myoclonic-astatic epilepsy (MAE), myoclonic absences (MA), benign myoclonic epilepsy in infancy (BMEI) and 4 patients had unspecified epileptic syndromes).
The electroclinical features suggested juvenile myoclonic epilepsy in 14 patients, progressive myoclonus epilepsy in three, progressive familial cerebellar ataxia with myoclonus in two, and severe myoclonic epilepsy of infancy in one.
In the idiopathic generalized epilepsies we consider the benign myoclonic epilepsy of infancy and its reflex variant, juvenile myoclonic epilepsy and palpebral myoclonias with absences.
Group 5 comprises the true myoclonic epilepsies, differentiating syndromes recognized as idiopathic--such as "Benign myoclonic epilepsy of infancy" and "Juvenile myoclonic epilepsy"--from those which are cryptogenic and carry a more cautious prognosis--as "Cryptogenic myoclonic and myoclonoastatic epilepsies" and "Severe myoclonic epilepsy of infancy".
Interaction studies also showed that CEP78 binds to FAM161A, another ciliary protein associated with retinal degeneration.
Altogether, our data strongly suggest that mutations in CEP78 cause a previously undescribed clinical entity of a ciliary nature characterized by blindness and deafness but clearly distinct from Usher syndrome, a condition for which visual impairment is due to retinitis pigmentosa.
Methods Eligible survivors had curable breast or colorectal cancer or melanoma, had completed treatment (not including endocrine therapy) 2 months to 5 years previously, were age &gt; 18 years, and had scores above the clinical cutoff on the FCR Inventory (FCRI) severity subscale at screening.
ConquerFear participants had clinically and statistically greater improvements than control participants from T0 to T1 on FCRI total ( P &lt; .001) and severity subscale scores ( P = .001), which were maintained at T2 ( P = .017 and P = .023, respectively) and, for FCRI total only, at T3 ( P = .018), and from T0 to T1 on three FCRI subscales (coping, psychological distress, and triggers) as well as in general anxiety, cancer-specific distress (total), and mental quality of life and metacognitions (total).
Differences in FCRI psychological distress and cancer-specific distress (total) remained significantly different at T3.
Ganoderic acid interacts and modulates the signaling network in IR, IGFR-1, IGFR-2, VEGFR-1, VEFGR-2, and EGFR in cancer signaling pathways.
Sixty-four patients with hematological tumors were selected and divided into the group complicated with bacterial infection (infection group, 33 cases) and the non-infection group (31 cases), the flow cytometry was be used to detect the related peripheral blood markers CD64 and CD14, the nCD64 IND and CD14 IND were calculated, and the peripheral blood WBC count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP) were determined at the same time.
The study objectives are to translate the FCRI in Dutch, and to explore the factor structure and the psychometric qualities of the Dutch translation of the Fear of Cancer Recurrence Inventory (FCRI-NL).
The Severity subscale (FCRI-SF-NL) may be a valuable screening tool for fear of cancer recurrence severity in clinical care.
FCI features, with single-tube 8-color combination using CD45, CD34, HAL-DR, CD11b, CD13, CD33, and CD117 and CD64, were compared for the 30 consecutive APL and 30 non-APL acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cases which morphologically mimicked an APL.
Recently, CLPB deficiency has been shown to cause a genetic syndrome with cataracts, neutropenia, and 3-methylglutaconic aciduria.
CLPB deficiency should be considered in neonates with absence of voluntary movements, respiratory insufficiency and swallowing problems, especially if associated with 3-methylglutaconic aciduria, neutropenia and cataracts.
Mutations in CLPB, SERAC1, TAZ genes were identified in neonates with 3-methylglutaconic aciduria (3-MGA) as a discriminative feature.
Altogether, our study suggests that disruption of CLPB causes a novel form of neonatal encephalopathy associated with 3-methylglutaconic aciduria.
Taken together, mutations in CLPB define a syndrome with intellectual disability, congenital neutropenia, progressive brain atrophy, movement disorder, cataracts, and 3-methylglutaconic aciduria.
We conclude that accumulation of protein aggregates underlies the development of cataracts and nephrocalcinosis in CLPB deficiency, which is a novel genetic cause of 3-methylglutaconic aciduria.
We now propose that perturbation of the mitochondrial membranes by abnormal protein aggregates leads to 3-methylglutaconic aciduria in CLPB deficiency.
Here, we present mechanistic details about the Hsp100 chaperone inhibition by GdmCl using the Hsp104 homolog ClpB from Thermus thermophilus.
We present a crystal structure of ClpB NBD1 in complex with GdmCl and ADP, showing that the Gdm(+) ion binds specifically to the active site of NBD1.
One patient with nesidioblastosis had no response to secretin, indicating that the pathophysiology of this entity is distinct from that of other forms of islet hyperplasia.
In addition, the ability to respond to secretin appears to be lost in patients with single insulinomas and nesidioblastosis, but not in those with multiple B-cell adenomas and hyperplasia.
In addition, HLXB9 is recurrently rearranged in young children with acute myeloid leukemia characterized by a chromosomal translocation t(7;12)-HLXB9/TEL and concomitant high expression of the unrearranged, wild-type HLXB9 allele.
Herein, we report the clinical course of an 8-month-old patient with acute myeloid leukemia, M2 subtype and with a HLXB9/TEL rearrangement.
Using RT-PCR, we screened members of the EHG family of homeobox genes, comprising EN1 (at 2q14), GBX2 (at 2q36), and EN2, GBX1, and HLXB9 (at 7q36), for dysregulation in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cell lines indicated by chromosomal breakpoints at these sites.
Previously, we showed that KLF5 is a mediator of RAS/MAPK and WNT signaling pathways under homeostatic conditions and that it promotes their tumorigenic functions during the development and progression of intestinal adenomas.
Moreover, production of lethal adenomas and carcinomas by specific expression of an oncogenic mutant of Beta-catenin in Lgr5(+) stem cells was suppressed completely by Klf5 deletion in the same cells.
Elevated levels of two particular Fbxw7 substrates, Klf5 and Tgif1, were found in normal intestine and adenomas of R482Q/+, R482Q/R482Q and Fbxw7(-/-) mice, but not Fbxw7(+/-) animals.
Here we investigated the in vivo effect of Klf5 heterozygosity on the propensity of ApcMin/KRASV12 double transgenic mice to develop intestinal tumors.
To determine whether KLF5 contributes to intestinal adenoma formation, we examined tumor burdens in Apc(Min/+) mice and Apc(Min/+)/Klf5(+/-) mice.
Compared with Apc(Min/+) mice, Apc(Min/+)/Klf5(+/-) mice had a 96% reduction in the number of intestinal adenomas.
Thus, KLF5 is necessary for the tumor-initiating activity of beta-catenin during intestinal adenoma formation in Apc(Min/+) mice, and reduced expression of KLF5 offsets the tumor-initiating activity of the Apc(Min) mutation by reducing the nuclear localization and activity of beta-catenin.
KLF5 expression was examined in intestinal tumors derived from transgenic mice expressing KRAS(V12G) under villin promoter and in human colorectal cancers with mutated KRAS.
In vivo, both intestinal tumors derived from mice transgenic for villin-KRAS(V12G) and human primary colorectal cancers with mutated KRAS contained high levels of KLF5 and increased staining of the proliferative marker Ki67.
Elevated levels of KLF5 protein are strongly correlated with activating KRAS mutations in intestinal tumors in vitro and in vivo.
Ras-transformation also markedly down-regulated KLF5; further analysis indicated that reduced expression of KLF5 mRNA and destabilization of KLF5 protein occur in intestinal tumors.
Reduced levels of KLF5 mRNA were also detected in APC(min) mouse and human familial adenomatous polyposis adenomas compared with normal crypt epithelium, indicating that down-regulation of KLF5 is an early event in intestinal tumorigenesis in vivo.
Collectively, these data indicate that intestinal tumor progression is associated with a change in the growth-related functions of KLF5 and that intestinal tumors down-regulate KLF5 expression by multiple mechanisms.
Variable major lipoprotein (Vmp) is a major tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-inducing component of Borrelia recurrentis, the agent of louse-borne relapsing fever.
Louse-borne relapsing fever, caused by Borrelia recurrentis, provides one of the best documented examples of the causative role of tumor necrosis factor (TNF) in the pathology of severe infection in humans.
Severe Jarisch Herxheimer reaction (J-HR) precipitated by antibiotic treatment of louse-borne relapsing fever (LBRF) is associated with a transient, marked rise in circulating tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNF alpha), interleukin 6 (IL-6) and interleukin 8 (IL-8).
In patients with louse-borne relapsing fever (Borrelia recurrentis infection), antimicrobial treatment is often followed by sudden fever, rigors, and persistent hypotension (Jarisch-Herxheimer reactions) that are associated with increases in plasma concentrations of tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha), interleukin-6, and interleukin-8.
Pretreatment with sheep anti-TNF-alpha Fab suppresses Jarisch-Herxheimer reactions that occur after penicillin treatment for louse-borne relapsing fever, reduces the associated increases in plasma concentrations of interleukin-6 and interleukin-8, and may be useful in other forms of sepsis.
A frail 84-year old lady with situs inversus totalis and symptomatic aortic stenosis underwent a successful transcatheter aortic valve implantation (TAVI) after extensive diagnostic work-up.
Here, we report the first known case of Marfan's syndrome, combined with situs inversus totalis with dextrocardia and discrete subaortic stenosis and aortic insufficiency in a 22-year-old woman.
Low-frequency artifacts that plague traditional TIE methods can be suppressed without an excessive number of captured images.
The FGF9 subfamily, including FGF9, FGF16, and FGF20, in addition to rhFGF16, rhFGF9, and rhFGF20, were shown to stimulate the proliferation and migration of HuH7 human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells.
FGF16 promoted proliferation and invasion behavior of SKOV-3 ovarian cancer cells, whose function may be similar in lung cancer.
This finding indicated possible involvement of FGF16 in ovarian cancer progression.
We observed that FGF16 stimulates the proliferation of human ovarian adenocarcinoma cells, SKOV-3 and OAW-42.
Taken together, our findings indicate that FGF16 in conjunction with Wnt pathway contributes to the cancer phenotype of ovarian cells and suggests that modulation of its expression in ovarian cells might be a promising therapeutic strategy for the treatment of invasive ovarian cancers.
Loss-of-function mutations in the UBR1 gene cause Johanson-Blizzard syndrome, which involves pancreatic exocrine insufficiency.
Johanson-Blizzard syndrome (JBS) is considered as an infrequent, but clinically easily recognizable autosomal recessive entity by the pathognomonic combination of congenital exocrine pancreatic insufficiency and hypoplastic alae nasi, in addition to other distinctive findings such as scalp defects, hypothyroidism, and rectourogenital malformations.
There are few reports of patients with JBS in association with facial clefting, referring all to types 2 to 6 of Tessier's classification that can be characterized properly as oblique facial clefts (OFCs).
We describe the clinical aspects in four patients with JBS and extensive OFCs.
In all of them, the diagnosis of JBS was confirmed by the demonstration of homozygous or compound-heterozygous mutations in the UBR1 gene.
Additionally, we review three previously reported cases of JBS with OFCs.
Taking into account a number of approximately 100 individuals affected by JBS that have been published in the literature we estimate that the frequency of OFCs in JBS is between 5% and 10%.
This report emphasizes that extensive OFCs may be the severe end of the spectrum of facial malformations occurring in JBS.
Johanson-Blizzard Syndrome (JBS) (MIM #243800) is a rare autosomal recessive genetic disorder characterized by exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, abnormal facial appearance and varying degrees of mental retardation.
Here, we report a 3 year-old mentally normal JBS girl.
With these findings, JBS diagnosis was established clinically.
Johanson-Blizzard syndrome (JBS) is a rare autosomal recessive syndrome characterized by dysmorphic nasal alae, ectodermal abnormalities, exocrine pancreatic insufficiency and early growth failure.
Nonsense, frame shift and splice-site mutations of the ubiquitin ligase gene (UBR1) lead to early loss of acinar cells in individuals with JBS.
This case illustrates that the phenotypic variability of pancreatic involvement in JBS may be subtle and may not manifest until the second decade of life.
Johanson-Blizzard syndrome (JBS) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder resulting from loss-of-function mutations in the UBR1 gene.
JBS can be easily recognized by its unique clinical presentation (including exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, hypoplasia/aplasia of the alae nasi, congenital scalp defects, sensorineural hearing loss, growth retardation, psychomotor retardation, and anal and genitourinary anomalies).
The objective of this study is to report on the first familial case of gender-discordant twins presenting JBS and a novel mutation in the UBR1 gene.
We also review literature describing molecularly confirmed cases of JBS.
Both patients presented typical clinical features of JBS.
Severe presentation of JBS usually involves deleterious (nonsense, frameshift, or splice-site) mutations in the UBR1 gene that are thought to completely abolish the expression of a functional protein product, as in this familial case; however, milder presentation of JBS has occasionally been observed with missense mutations in at least 1 of the 2 copies of UBR1, in which there may be residual activity of the product of this gene.
Johanson-Blizzard syndrome (JBS) is a rare, autosomal recessive disorder characterized by exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, typical facial features, dental anomalies, hypothyroidism, sensorineural hearing loss, scalp defects, urogenital and anorectal anomalies, short stature, and cognitive impairment of variable degree.
Mutation types include nonsense, frameshift, splice site, missense, and small in-frame deletions consistent with the hypothesis that loss of UBR1 protein function is the molecular basis of JBS.
The review of clinical data of a large number of molecularly confirmed JBS cases allows us to define minimal clinical criteria for the diagnosis of JBS.
Johanson-Blizzard syndrome (JBS) is a rare autosomal recessive disease characterized by exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, hypoplastic or aplastic nasal alae, cutis aplasia on the scalp, and other features including developmental delay, failure to thrive, hearing loss, mental retardation, hypothyroidism, dental abnormalities, and anomalies in cardiac and genitourinary systems.
We describe the case of a male infant with typical symptoms of JBS.
Johanson-Blizzard syndrome (JBS; OMIM 243800) is an autosomal recessive disorder that includes congenital exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, facial dysmorphism with the characteristic nasal wing hypoplasia, multiple malformations, and frequent mental retardation.
Our previous work has shown that JBS is caused by mutations in human UBR1, which encodes one of the E3 ubiquitin ligases of the N-end rule pathway.
Most JBS-causing alterations of UBR1 are nonsense, frameshift or splice-site mutations that abolish UBR1 activity.
We report here missense mutations of human UBR1 in patients with milder variants of JBS.
Taking advantage of this conservation, we constructed alleles of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae UBR1 that were counterparts of missense JBS-UBR1 alleles.
Among these yeast Ubr1 mutants, one of them (H160R) was inactive in yeast-based activity assays, the other one (Q1224E) had a detectable but weak activity, and the third one (V146L) exhibited a decreased but significant activity, in agreement with manifestations of JBS in the corresponding JBS patients.
These results, made possible by modeling defects of a human ubiquitin ligase in its yeast counterpart, verified and confirmed the relevance of specific missense UBR1 alleles to JBS, and suggested that a residual activity of a missense allele is causally associated with milder variants of JBS.
We report on a triplet pregnancy of consanguineous parents with one fetus being affected by recurrent Johanson-Blizzard syndrome (JBS).
In addition to the lack of exocrine acini as the characteristic feature of JBS, the pancreas revealed a resorptive inflammatory reaction with infiltration by eosinophilic granulocytes that focally dispersed onto islets of Langerhans, thus favoring a progressive destructive rather than primary dysplastic process and possibly explaining the occurrence of diabetes mellitus in later life.
JBS maps to chromosome 15q15-q21.1 and is associated with mutations in the UBR1 gene.
Johanson-Blizzard syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive multisystem disorder, it is characterized by the association of congenital exocrine pancreatic insufficiency and hypoplasia or aplasia of the nasal wings, and can be diagnosed by clinical characteristics and UBR1 gene analysis.
* Sixteen distinct haplotypes were detected from 258 individuals in the C. conica complex inferred from the cpDNA sequences of intergenic spacer (IGS) between atpB and rbcL, IGS between trnT and trnL, trnL intron, and IGS between trnL and trnF.
Maximum parsimony and Bayesian inference analyses of DNA sequence data of the plastid (the trnT-L igs, the trnL intron, two parts of the trnK intron, and the psbA-trnH igs) and nuclear genome (ITS1, 5.8S, and ITS2) showed these markers to be suitable to assess the species composition of sect.
However, the primers for amplification of chloroplast trnD-trnT intron and rRNA IGS failed to amplify the respective region in Elymus species.
New primer pairs were designed and successfully amplified the cpDNA trnD-trnT intron and rRNA IGS region in Elymus species.
In the present study, we investigated the effect of taspine derivative 12k on human colorectal cancer targeted at EphrinB2 and its PDZ.
In this study, we investigated the mechanism of chemoresistance and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in colorectal cancer involving the gain-of-function (GOF) mutant p53/ephrin-B2 signaling axis.
Twenty proteins from different signaling pathways (epidermal growth factor receptor [EGFR], phosphorylated extracellular signal regulated kinase [pERK], receptor for hyalouronic acid mediated motility [RHAMM], Raf-1 kinase inhibitor protein [RKIP], Beta-catenin, E-cadherin, phosphorylated AK transforming [pAKT], p16, p21, Ki-67, B-cell Lymphoma-2 [BCL2], vascular endothelial growth factor, apoptosis protease activating factor 1 [APAF-1], mucin1 [MUC1], ephrin B2 receptor [EphB2], matrix metalloproteinase 7 [MMP7], phosphorylated mothers against decapentaplegic 2 [pSMAD2], caudal type homeobox transcription factor 2 [CDX2], Laminin5Gamma2, and mammalian sterile 20-like kinase 1 [MST1]) involved in colorectal cancer progression were studied immunohistochemically on 220 well-characterized patients using a multiple-punch tissue microarray including 437 and 430 samples from the tumor center and the invasive front, respectively.
Abundant expression of IFN-Gamma-inducible protein 10 (IP-10) was observed on macrophages and in T cells in perimysial infiltrates of dermatomyositis (DM), and strong chemokine (C-X-C motif) receptor (CXCR)3 expression was observed on the majority of T cells in DM.
Abundant expression of IP-10 was observed on macrophages and T cells surrounding and invading non-necrotic muscle fibers in polymyositis and sporadic inclusion body myositis and in T cells in perimysial infiltrates of dermatomyositis.
DORs were colocalized in tissue slices and synaptosomes from the canine right atrium and SA node along with cholinergic and adrenergic markers, vesicular acetylcholine transporter (VAChT), and tyrosine hydroxylase (TH).
Furthermore, the lack of interdigital programmed cell death and associated syndactyly was related to down-regulated gene expression of Bmp2, Bmp7, Msx1, and Msx2, which are known to promote apoptosis in the interdigital mesenchyme.
In this context, ERdj3 suppression may eliminate the toxic gain of function associated with polymerization of ZAAT, thus providing a potential new therapeutic approach to the treatment of AATD-related liver disease.
The CPK, aldolase, GOT, GPT, and LDH concentrations in the serum and lumbar CSF of 80 patients with neuromuscular diseases and 20 controls were measured.
In 60 cases of various neuromuscular diseases, serum CA-III, CPK and aldolase were measured.
Together, our results show that P. gingivalis activates the ERK1/2-Ets1, p38/HSP27, and PAR2/NF-kB pathways to induce proMMP9 expression, after which the proenzyme is activated by gingipains to promote cellular invasion of OSCC cell lines.
Tissue sections ranging from normal mucosa to moderately-differentiated oral squamous cell carcinoma were studied using monoclonal antibodies against N-ras and ets-1 proteins.
In a randomized controlled trial of patients with dyslipidemia assigned to either extended release niacin (ERN) alone, ERN combined with the selective prostaglandin D2 receptor subtype 1 inhibitor laropiprant (ERN-L) or placebo, niacin lowered serum phosphorus; however, it is not known if it lowers FGF23 concentrations.
The use of nicotinic acid to treat dyslipidemia is limited by induction of a "flushing" response, mediated in part by the interaction of prostaglandin D(2) (PGD(2)) with its G-protein coupled receptor, DP1 (Ptgdr).
We performed a post hoc data analysis of serum phosphorus concentrations that had been determined serially (at baseline and weeks 4, 8, 12, 18, and 24) among 1547 patients who had dyslipidemia and were randomly assigned in a 3:2:1 ratio to treatment with extended release niacin (ERN; 1 g/d for 4 weeks and dose advanced to 2 g/d for 20 weeks) combined with the selective prostaglandin D2 receptor subtype 1 inhibitor laropiprant (L; n = 761), ERN alone (n = 518), or placebo (n = 268).
Apart from primary aldosteronism, mineralocorticoid excess can be caused by congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) due to mutations of the 11beta-hydroxylase and 17alpha-hydroxylase genes, by inactivating mutations of the glucocorticoid receptor gene (Chrousos syndrome), endogenous hypercortisolism (Cushing's syndrome), by mutations of the 11beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2 gene (apparent mineralocorticoid excess/AME) or licorice/carbenoxolone intake, mutations of the epithelial sodium channel genes (Liddle syndrome), mutations of the mineralocorticoid receptor gene (Geller syndrome), and by mutations in the WNK1, WNK4, KLHL3, CUL3 genes (pseudohypoaldosteronism type 2 or Gordon syndrome).
We provide an overview and diagnostic approach to apparent mineralocorticoid excess, glucocorticoid remediable aldosteronism, familial hyperaldosteronism type 2, Liddle's syndrome, Gordon's syndrome, activating mutations of the mineralocorticoid receptor, generalized glucocorticoid resistance and hypertensive forms of congenital adrenal hyperplasia.
As chronic pancreatitis (CP) is characterized by tissue infiltration of inflammatory cells, fibrosis, pancreatic neuritis and severe pain, the roles of fractalkine and CX3CR1 were investigated in CP (n=61) and normal pancreas (NP, n=21) by QRT-PCR, western blot and immunohistochemistry analyses.
Neuro-immunoreactivity for fractalkine and CX3CR1 was strongest in patients suffering from severe pain and pancreatic neuritis.
Our data suggest that CRISPR/Cas9-mediated NRL disruption in rods may be a promising treatment option for patients with retinitis pigmentosa.
The index patients were homozygotes for both a dominant mutation of the PABPN1 gene, (GCN)13, and a recessive mutation of the NRL gene, p.R31X, on chromosome 14q11.1, leading to early-onset OPMD accompanied by night blindness and reduced visual acuity.
Homozygosity for the recessive NRL mutation described here appears to be associated with a distinct retinal phenotype, demonstrating ERG characteristics similar to those of ESCS patients.
This report expands the spectrum of NRL recessive mutations, as well as the genetic spectrum of ESCS, and indicates a new syndrome of OPMD with an ESCS-like phenotype.
Blue light exposure of the R91W;Nrl(-/-) mouse could therefore be used to study molecular events preceding edema formation in a cone-rich environment, and thus potentially help to develop treatment strategies for edema-based complications in macular degenerations.
CXCL6 and CXCL2 enhanced angiogenesis by HUVECs when cultured with fibroblast cells and colon cancer cells (P &lt; 0.01).
After quality and quantity measurements, gene expression analysis of a colorectal cancer-specific marker set with 11 genes (CA7, COL12A1, CXCL1, CXCL2, CHI3L1, GREM1, IL1B, IL1RN, IL8, MMP3, SLC5A7) was performed with array real-time PCR using Transcriptor First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (Roche) and RealTime ready assays on LightCycler480 System (Roche).
These observations indicate a crucial role for TANs in the initiation and progression of CAC and suggest that the CXCL2-CXCR2 axis might be useful in reducing the risk of UC-associated colon cancer.
Gene expression analysis of a colorectal cancer-specific marker set (with 7 genes: COL12A1, CXCL1, CXCL2, GREM1, IL1B, IL8, SLC7A5) was performed with array real-time PCR using Transcriptor First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (Roche) and RealTime ready assays on LightCycler(R) 480 System (Roche).
It is approved for use in all indications for which reference etanercept is approved, including rheumatoid arthritis, juvenile idiopathic arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, non-radiographic axial spondyloarthritis, plaque psoriasis and paediatric plaque psoriasis.
We describe the case of a boy with a TUBA1A mutation presenting with microphthalmia and congenital cataracts in addition to microcephaly and severe brain malformation.
Recently, modifications of ABeta1-42 levels in CSF and plasma associated with improvement in memory and language functions have been observed in patients with mild-moderate Alzheimer's disease (AD) treated with plasma exchange (PE) with albumin replacement.
We previously showed that Decorin--a leucine-rich proteoglycan inhibiting the progression of glomerulonephritis and glomerular sclerosis--can be degraded by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway and deubiquitinated and stabilized by ubiquitin-specific processing protease 2-69(Usp2-69).
Here, we explored the effect of Usp2-69 on MC proliferation and ECM deposition by transfecting Usp2-69 plasmid into rat anti-Thy1.1 nephritis model and into cultured MCs, as well as detected Usp2-69 and Decorin in rat anti-Thy1.1 nephritis model by western blot.
Overexpressing Usp2-69 at the early stage, but not advanced stage, of anti-Thy1.1 nephritis alleviated cell proliferation and ECM deposition, which was shown by decreased Ki-67, Collagen IV and Fibronectin detected by immunohistochemistry.
In conclusion, our findings suggest that Usp2-69 overexpression alleviates the progression of rat anti-Thy1.1 nephritis and, therefore, that exogenous plasmid injection via the renal artery enhanced by electrotransfer technology could be a promising avenue for glomerular disease research.
The proportion of USP2-69 positive area in the glomeruli was 3.90% in normal kidney, 4.96% in minimal change disease, and 4.39% in membranous glomerulonephritides, while it was 14.84% in IgA nephropathy (IgAN) (mesangial proliferative type), 16.18% in lupus nephritis (LN; diffuse proliferative type) and 15.54% in acute proliferative glomerulonephritides (APGN); the difference of the percentages between IgAN, LN (IV subtype) and APGN and normal kidney were statistically significant (P &lt; 0.05).
We analysed surviving human SN DA neurons from patients with Parkinson's disease and from controls, and detected elevated messenger RNA levels of D2-autoreceptors and GIRK2 in Parkinson's disease.
Thus, our findings provide a novel homeostatic functional link in SN DA neurons between Cav1.3- L-type-Ca(2+) channels and D2-autoreceptor activity, controlled by NCS-1, and indicate that this adaptive signalling network (Cav1.3/NCS-1/D2/GIRK2) is also active in human SN DA neurons, and contributes to Parkinson's disease pathology.
In conclusion, sera from AIH-1 patients reacted with the amino acids in the sequence 33-37 (PQDGS) of the N-terminal of UGT1A6.
Several proapoptotic genes (AKT1 and AKT2) were down-regulated and antiapoptotic genes (APAF1 and BCL2L1) were up-regulated in multiple myeloma, both symptomatic and asymptomatic, compared to monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance.
To study the role of gene promoter hypermethylation of the putative tumour suppressor genes involved in the death-associated protein (DAP) kinase/p14/HDM2/p53/Apaf-1 apoptosis pathway in multiple myeloma (MM).
The other was a spermatocytic seminoma with focal primitive neuroectodermal differentiation: formation of Homer-Wright rosettes and perivascular pseudorosettes, with immunoreactivity for S-100 protein, neuron-specific enolase, synaptophysin, neurofilament-68 kDa, microtubule-associated protein 2, and vimentin.
In addition to Rett syndrome and breast/ovarian cancer observed in other studies, we report evidence for the first time, to our knowledge, that overexpression of ubiquinol-cytochrome c reductase core protein I might affect mitochondrial morphology and/or physiology and lead to development of obesity and related conditions.
From the therapeutic standpoint, colitis-associated cancers are associated with a lower prevalence of KRAS mutations than the sporadic variant.
In a murine acute systemic candidiasis model, C albicans strongly stimulated hepcidin, accompanied by a major reduction in transferrin saturation.
On the other hand, iron overload (iron saturated transferrin) is a serious risk factor for candidiasis in newborn and in leukemic patients.
It has been suggested that blockade of the Na+/H+ exchanger (NHE1) can prevent atrial fibrillation (AF)-induced electrical remodeling and the development of AF.
The case of a 13-year-old boy is presented and the diagnostic process discussed especially the differentiation between trance states and epilepsy.
The phenotype is usually T-B+NK+ SCID with lymphopenia where the clinical findings may be mild (CD3Gamma) or severe (CD3Delta, Epsilon, Zeta) owing to the underlying molecular defect.
In contrast, all reported human complete CD3delta (or CD3epsilon) deficiencies are in infants with life-threatening SCID and very severe alphabeta and gammadelta T lymphocytopenia.
Although clozapine, olanzapine, and other atypical antipsychotic drugs (APDs) have fewer extrapyramidal side effects, they have serious metabolic side effects such as substantial weight gain, intra-abdominal obesity, and type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Given that most patients with mental disorders face chronic, even life-long, treatment with APDs, the risks of weight gain/obesity and other metabolic symptoms are major considerations for APD maintenance treatment.
Although offering many benefits for several psychiatric disorders, antipsychotic drugs (APDs) as a class have a major liability in their tendency to promote adiposity, obesity, and metabolic dysregulation in an already metabolically vulnerable population.
To describe the association between obesity and the use of antipsychotic drugs (APDs) in adult outpatients followed-up on in five Primary Care settings.
Obesity was associated with the use of APDs [OR = 1.5 (CI: 1.3-1.8)], hypertension [OR = 2.4 (CI: 2.2-2.5)], diabetes [OR = 1.4 (CI: 1.3-1.5)] and dyslipidemia [OR = 1.3 (CI: 1.2-1.4)], p &lt; 0.0001 in all cases.
Obesity was associated with the use of APDs, regardless of the type of drug, and with the presence of hypertension, diabetes and dyslipidemia.
Higher DARs were associated with lower rates of moderate or severe paravalvular aortic regurgitation: DAR &lt;=10%, 17.6%; DAR 10% to 15%, 9.9%; DAR 15% to 20%, 6.3%; and DAR &gt;20%, 4.9%; P&lt;0.001.
In 1990, Hopkins and Ruiz-Riben stated that the target date o f the end o f 1995 for the eradication of dracunculiasis is unrealistic only if it is judged to be unimportant.
DLL1 influence drug resistance of small cell lung cancer through activating transcription of downstream genes HES1 and HEY1.
In this study, we showed that a high percentage of lung cancer lines expressed Jagged1, Notch receptors, and their transcriptional target genes (HES1, Hey1), suggesting that the Notch pathway plays an important role in lung cancer biology.
ALPs easily insert in the outer leaflet of the plasma membrane and cross the membrane via an ATP-dependent CDC50a-containing 'flippase' complex (in carcinoma cells), or are internalized by lipid raft-dependent endocytosis (in lymphoma/leukemic cells).
Levels of 27 transcripts were investigated as potential novel markers for prostate cancer, including genes encoding plasma membrane proteins (ADAM2, ELOVL5, MARCKSL1, RAMP1, TMEM30A, and TMEM66); secreted proteins (SPON2, TMEM30A, TMEM66, and truncated TMEFF2 (called POP4)); intracellular proteins (CAMK2N1, DHCR24, GLO1, NGFRAP1, PGK1, PSMA7, SBDS, and YWHAQ); and noncoding transcripts (POP1 (100 kb) from mRNA AK000023), POP2 (4 kb from mRNA AL832227), POP3 (50 kb from EST CFI40309), POP5 (intron of NCAM2, accession DO668384), POP6 (intron of FHIT), POP7 (intron of TNFAIP8), POP8 (intron of EFNA5), POP9 (intron of DSTN), POP10 (intron of ADAM2, accession DO668396), POP11 (87kb from EST BG194644), and POP12 (intron of EST BQ226050)).
Levels of CAMK2N1, GLO1, SDBS, and TMEM30A transcripts tended to be increased in primary prostate cancer from patients who later had biochemical failure.
Human CDC50A mRNA was expressed in embryonic stem (ES) cells, placenta, brain and chondrosarcoma, while CDC50B mRNA was expressed in pancreatic islet, kidney, prostate as well as in lung carcinoid, parathyroid tumor, bladder tumor, meningioma and pancreatic cancer.
Finally, ephrin-B2/Fc promoted angiogenesis in vivo in corneal neovascularization and Matrigel plug assays in adult mice, whereas LY294002 reduced angiogenesis in Matrigel that was induced by ephrin-B2/Fc.
Mutations of SYNGAP1 have been frequently linked to brain disorders including intellectual disability, autisms, and seizure.
Furthermore, the LTP-regulated phosphoproteins, which included the scaffold proteins Shank3, Syngap1, Dlgap1, and Dlg4, represented the "PSD risk" for schizophrenia and autism spectrum disorder, such that without these proteins in the analysis, the association with the PSD and these two psychiatric diseases was not present.
Developmental delay was the first manifestation of SYNGAP1-related encephalopathy; intellectual disability became progressively obvious and was associated with autistic behaviours in eight patients.
The only two genes upregulated across all transcriptome-wide PE analyses to date (microarray, RNA-Seq and PAS-Seq) are NRIP1 (RIP140), a transcriptional co-regulator linked to metabolic syndromes associated with obesity, and Flt1.
Furthermore, endothelial Flt1 gene deletion enhanced the effect of VEGFB, activating the thermogenic program in subcutaneous adipose tissue, which increased the basal metabolic rate, thus preventing diet-induced obesity and related metabolic complications.
(2016) demonstrate that VEGF-B, by displacing VEGF-A from VEGFR1 and activating VEGFR2, increases adipose tissue vascularity, improves insulin sensitivity, diminishes obesity, and alleviates metabolic syndrome.
Here, we hypothesized that increased activity of PlGF/VEGFR-1 signaling mediates obesity-induced tumor progression by augmenting tumor angiogenesis and TAM recruitment/activity.
Ablation of VEGFR-1 signaling prevented obesity-induced tumor progression and shifted the tumor immune environment toward an antitumor phenotype.
Targeting PlGF/VEGFR-1 signaling reprograms the tumor immune microenvironment and inhibits obesity-induced acceleration of tumor progression.
In a group of unmedicated patients with major depressive disorder matched for age with normal control group, we found a significant increase in 5-HT (100 microM)-induced accumulation of IP-1 (150 +/- 7% of basal for depressed patients, 132 +/- 3% for controls).
It is hoped that the same will happen in other MPN with specific genetic alterations: polycythemia vera (JAK2 V617F and other JAK2 mutations), essential thrombocythemia (JAK2V617F and MPL515 mutations), primary myelofibrosis (JAK2 V617F and MPL515 mutations), systemic mastocytosis (KITD816V and other KIT mutations) and stem cell leukaemia/lymphoma (ZNF198-FGFR1 and other FGFR1 fusion genes).
We show that stimulation of B-cells with the TLR9 ligands CpG-oligodeoxynucleotides (CpG-ODN) prevents spontaneous and irradiation-induced death of normal peripheral blood B-cells, and of B-cells from patients diagnosed with Common variable immunodeficiency (CVID).
Decreased IFN-Alfa secretion induced by TLR7/TLR8 activation was observed in CVID, which was recovered with TLR9 signaling.
Our findings revealed that TLR9 activation has an adjuvant effect on the altered type I response in CVID.
We activated purified CVID B-cells with surrogate T-dependent (anti-CD40), T-independent (TLR-9 ligand) stimuli or through B-cell receptor engagement (anti-IgM) with or without IL-21.
Moreover, studies at the single cell level showed that DCs from CVID patients and healthy controls produced similar amounts of interferon-Alfa or interleukin-12 and expressed similar levels of activation markers in response to human cytomegalovirus and ligands for TLR-7 and TLR-9.
In conclusion, it seems unlikely that CVID is secondary to insufficient production of naturally occurring DCs or a defect in their signalling through TLR-7 or TLR-9.
Given the established link between vitamin A deficiency and increased susceptibility to infections, we investigated the ability of the vitamin A metabolite all-trans retinoic acid (RA) to restore the defective immune responses in CVID-derived B cells activated through the TLRs TLR9 and RP105.
This can be explained by impaired RA-mediated isotype switching in TLR9/RP105-stimulated CVID-derived B cells owing to reduced induction of activation-induced deaminase.
The ability of RA to improve critical immune parameters in CVID-derived B cells stimulated through TLR9 and RP105 support the possibility of combining RA with TLR stimulation for the treatment of CVID.
The CD21(low) V(H)1-69(+) B cells of MC patients, like those of CVID and HIV patients, are anergic to BCR and TLR9 stimulation and display deregulation of several anergy-related genes; proliferative anergy is also observed in CD21(high) MZ-like V(H)1-69(+) B cells, that over-express the antiproliferative transcriptional repressor Stra13.
The secretion of glucagon by islet Alfa cells is normally suppressed by high blood glucose, but this suppressibility is impaired in patients with diabetes or cystic fibrosis (CF), a disease caused by mutations in the gene encoding CF transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR), a cyclic adenosine monophosphate-activated Cl- channel.
The results reveal that by potentiating KATP channels, CFTR acts as a glucose-sensing negative regulator of glucagon secretion in Alfa cells, a defect of which may contribute to glucose intolerance in CF and other types of diabetes.
Although Beta-cell dysfunction in cystic fibrosis (CF) leads to diabetes, the mechanism by which the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) channel influences islet insulin secretion remains debated.
Baseline estimated cost in 2008 for a hypothetical underweight, homozygous F508del-CFTR 6-year-old female without chronic Pseudomonas aeruginosa/Staphylococcus aureus, CF-related diabetes (CFRD) or methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA), and with a poor percent predicted forced expiratory volume in 1 s (ppFEV1) was Euro10,113, and was Euro21,082 in a 25-year-old with the same hypothetical profile.
The goal of this work was to evaluate renal function and the expression of megalin, cubilin, CFTR (cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator), and ClC-5 in the proximal tubule and renal cortex of rats with type 1 diabetes.
Mean values in lichen ruber planus were Zn 784 micrograms/l, RBP 5.26 mg/dl and Vit A 656 ng/ml; in leukoplakia Zn 696 micrograms/l, RBP 5.30 mg/dl and Vit A 652 ng/ml; and in OSCC Zn 659 micrograms/l, RBP 5.00 mg/dl and Vit A 617 ng/ml.
These observations indicate that HYA and PIIINP mainly reflect expansive synovitis proliferation while galectin-3 is more closely linked to autoimmunity, smoking and joint destructive processes.
In the entire UA cohort, galectin-3 correlated with the MRI bone marrow edema score, while PIIANP correlated with the MRI erosion score, and HYA with the synovitis and erosion scores.
Previous studies have reported overexpression of Galectin-3 in RA synovitis and increased levels in synovial fluid and serum in long-standing RA compared with osteoarthritis and healthy controls.
We defined by immunohistology the infiltrating cells and examined the in situ expression of plausible protagonists in synovitis of FMF: myeloperoxidase, lysozyme, galectin 1, galectin 3, p65 (RelA)/nuclear factor KB, inducible nitric-oxide synthase, cyclooxygenase 2, and cleaved caspase 3.
Only one of these, pFLJ2, was mobilized by the IncP plasmids RP4, pRK231 and R702, but not by plasmids pSa, R40a, R387, pN3 or R16.
Changes in the frequencies of genotypes and mutant alleles of ACE, AGTR1, AGT, and ITGB3 genes were analyzed in patients with arterial hypertension coupled with metabolic syndrome (N=15) and compared with population data and corresponding parameters in patients with isolated hypertension (N=15).
We examined associations between 15 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) across ITGB3 and five CVD-related traits in the Hutterites: plasma levels of high density lipoprotein-cholesterol (HDL-c), triglycerides (TG), low density lipoprotein-cholesterol (LDL-c), and lipoprotein(a) [Lp(a)] and blood pressure or hypertension.
The present study was performed to investigate the expressions of transforming growth factor Beta1 (TGF-Beta1) and matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) in an experimental model of tympanosclerosis and their possible roles in the formation of this disorder.
RT-PCR analysis showed that the overall transcriptional activity of the main HS biosynthesis-involved genes (EXT1, EXT2, NDST1, NDST2, GLCE, HS2ST1, HS3ST1, HS3ST2, HS6ST1, HS6ST2, SULF1, SULF2, HPSE) was decreased by 1.5-2-fold in Grade II-III glioma (p &lt; 0.01) and by 3-fold in Grade IV glioma (glioblastoma multiforme, GBM) (p &lt; 0.05), as compared with the para-tumourous tissue.
This study aimed to analyze the expression and function of HS6ST3 in breast cancer.
HS6ST3 was found up-regulated in T47D, MCF7 and MDA-MB231 breast cancer cell lines.
Silencing HS6ST3 diminished tumor cell growth, migration and invasion, but enhanced cell adhesion and apoptosis in breast cancer.
Gene microarray analysis revealed that silencing HS6ST3 significantly changed the expression of IGF1R and XAF1 in breast cancer cells.
Further functional studies showed that the cellular processes were mediated by IGF1R and XAF1 after silencing HS6ST3 in breast cancer cells.
Together these results indicate that HS6ST3 might be involved in the tumorigenesis of breast cancer and it could be a promising target in breast cancer therapy.
We aimed to examine the relationship between the preoperative GSA index [uptake ratio of the liver to the liver plus heart at 15 min (LHL15) to uptake ratio of the heart at 15 min to that at 3 min (HH15) ratio] calculated from 99mTc-labeled diethylene triamine pentaacetate-galactosyl human serum albumin (99mTc-GSA) scintigraphy and background liver fibrosis and to investigate whether the GSA index can be a useful predictor in hepatitis C virus (HCV)-related hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) patients treated with surgical resection (SR).
Here we demonstrate that HS 6-O-sulfotransferases 1 and 2 (HS6ST-1 and HS6ST-2), which perform sulfation at 6-O position in glucosamine in HS, impact ovarian cancer angiogenesis through the HS-dependent HB-EGF/EGFR axis that subsequently modulates the expression of multiple angiogenic cytokines.
Down-regulation of HS6ST-1 or HS6ST-2 in human ovarian cancer cell lines results in 30-50% reduction in glucosamine 6-O-sulfate levels in HS, impairing HB-EGF-dependent EGFR signaling and diminishing FGF2, IL-6, and IL-8 mRNA and protein levels in cancer cells.
Our results show that in addition to the critical role that 6-O-sulfate moieties play in angiogenic cytokine activation, HS 6-O-sulfation level, determined by the expression of HS6ST isoforms in ovarian cancer cells, is a major regulator of angiogenic program in ovarian cancer cells impacting HB-EGF signaling and subsequent expression of angiogenic cytokines by cancer cells.
We have investigated whether the expression of HS6STs and SULFs changes during chondrosarcoma progression and have determined 6O-sulphation levels in two chondrosarcoma cell lines.
Immunohistochemistry on tissue microarrays of chondrosarcomas showed that HS6ST3 and SULF1 were highly expressed in most chondrosarcomas, whereas SULF2 expression was absent in most cases.
HS6ST1 and HS6ST2 expression are significantly increased during chondrosarcoma progression, which suggest that 6O-sulphation is increased during progression.
In conclusion, our results show increased HS6ST1 and HS6ST2 expression during chondrosarcoma progression and increased HS 6O-sulphation in vitro.
As 6O-sulphation plays an important role in signal transduction, altered HS6ST expression might be associated with changes in signal transduction pathways in chondrosarcoma progression.
Thus, neutrophils and NK cells act as important disease-promoting immune cells in experimental osteoarthritis and their functional interaction is promoted by the CXCL10/CXCR3 axis.
Ovarian cancer cell line OC316 was reverse transfected with a miR-223 mimic and relative expression levels of miR-223 and SMARCD1 were quantified by RT-PCR; protein expression of SMARCD1 was evaluated by Western Blot.
miR-223 expression was upregulated in high grade ovarian serous carcinoma samples (median RQ=4.8881, P=.0045), whilst SMARCD1 was down-regulated (median RQ=0.5107, P=.0492).
It was indicated that SWI/SNF related, matrix associated, actin dependent regulator of chromatin, subfamily D, member 1, SWI/SNF related, matrix associated, actin dependent regulator of chromatin, subfamily D, member 1, dihydropyrimidinase-like 2, RMND5A and ANGPTL1 were potential prognostic markers in breast cancer, and the cell cycle may be involved in the regulation of breast cancer.
MiR-490-3p plays a tumour suppressor role in epithelial ovarian cancer by targeting CDK1 regulation and influencing SMARCD1 and cyclin D1 (CCND1) expressions.
Hepatocyte-specific inactivation of Baf60a reduced bile acid production and cholesterol absorption, and attenuated diet-induced hypercholesterolemia and atherosclerosis in mice.
miR-7 expression reduced SMARCD1 protein expression in lung cancer cell lines.
We found that although SMARCD1 sensitized lung cancer cells to chemotherapy drug-induced apoptosis, miR-7 enhanced the drug resistance potential of lung cancer cells against chemotherapy drugs.
SMARCD1 was down-regulated in patients with non-small cell lung cancer and lung adenocarcinoma cell lines, and SMARCD1 and miR-7 expression levels were negatively correlated in clinical samples.
Our investigation into the involvement of the EGFR-regulated microRNA pathway in the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex suggests that EGFR-mediated miR-7 suppresses the coupling of the chromatin remodeling factor SMARCD1 with p53, resulting in increased chemo-resistance of lung cancer cells.
miR-490-3p exerted growth- and metastasis-suppressive effects on gastric cancer cells through directly targeting SMARCD1, a SWItch/Sucrose NonFermentable (SWI/SNF) chromatin remodeling complex subunit.
Knockdown of SMARCD1 significantly attenuated the protumorigenic effects of miR-490-3p inhibitor, whereas enforced expression of SMARCD1 promoted in vitro and in vivo oncogenic phenotypes of gastric cancer cells.
SMARCD1 was markedly upregulated in gastric cancer in which its high expression was associated with shortened patients' survival independent of TNM staging.
iTD, nTD, and ECLNI were all significant independent adverse factors for RFS in rectal cancer, and were all associated with pT, pN, and LN ratio.
Silencing CCM3 by siRNA stimulated endothelial proliferation, migration and sprouting accompanied by significant downregulation of the core components of Notch signalling including DLL4, Notch4, HEY2 and HES1 and by activation of VEGF and Erk pathways.
The aim was to assess the efficacy of glucomannan (GNN) as a sole treatment for functional constipation.
Children aged 3-16 years with functional constipation according to Rome III criteria were randomly assigned to receive GNN (2.52 g/d) or placebo for 4 weeks.
Interestingly, using Affymetrix gene expression data of a cohort of 285 patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML), we found that GNN/TU12B1-TY expression was specifically increased in two AML clusters.
The present results indicate that reduced function of TU12B1-TY may contribute to the development and/or progression of human pancreatic cancer.
To characterize morphologic alterations in the retina of the visual mutant zebrafish gantenbein (gnn) and to examine whether these alterations correlate with those present in human hereditary eye diseases.
Thus, the early developmental morphology of gnn exhibits similarities to cone dystrophies most commonly seen in age-related macular degeneration (AMD) among humans, whereas the later stages of degeneration in gnn resemble RPE alterations in retinitis pigmentosa (RP) in humans.
The gnn zebrafish mutant may therefore be a useful model for examining the possible interplay and connection between cone dystrophy and RPE degeneration.
Our goal was to assess the patterns of familial aggregation of three melanoma risk factors: great number of naevi (GNN), light phototype (LP) and high degree of sun exposure (HDSE).
Twenty-five patients were divided into the following groups: (1) chronic glomerulonephritis with normal renal function (GNN) (2) chronic glomerulonephritis with moderate renal insufficiency (GNI) (3) severe chronic renal failure undergoing maintenance dialysis (CRF) (4) acute renal failure during oliguric phase (ARF) (5) normal control without renal suffering (NC).
The levels of PTH/PTHrP receptor mRNA (corrected by beta-actin mRNA) in the kidney of GNN, GNI, CRF and ARF patients was markedly decreased by up to 35.7%, 68.5%, 77.9% and 92.2%, respectively.
Here, we tested whether rhMG53 protein can improve membrane repair in a dysferlin-deficient mouse model of LGMD2B (B6.129-Dysftm1Kcam/J).
Three interacting partners of dysferlin are also implicated in membrane resealing: caveolin-3 (in limb girdle muscular dystrophy type 1C), annexin A1, and the newly identified protein mitsugumin 53 (MG53).
Latency and amplitude of the visual P300 and N270 were examined in patients with transient ischemic attack (TIA) and in age-matched healthy control subjects to investigate the feasibility of N270 as a clinical examination method to evaluate the cognitive status of patients with TIA.
We applied multichannel recording of P300 in 28 patients (68.3 +/- 8.1 years; 15 asymptomatic, 13 with a history of transient ischemic attack (TIA)) and compared them with an age- and sex-matched control group.
Previous studies have implicated the roles of NT and NTR1 in the etiology or expression of schizophrenia.
This case-control study examined the associations between schizophrenia and three NTR1 gene polymorphisms (rs6090453C/G, rs6011914C/G, and rs2427422A/G) previously linked to working memory performance in a Han Chinese population.
This suggested that nonpeptide agonist mimetics acting at the NTR1 might be helpful in the treatment of Parkinson's disease and schizophrenia.
The patients carrying either one or both of GCT and AGG alleles of SP-A2 and patients with A allele at position 1011 of MBL had markedly higher eosinophilia, total IgE antibodies and lower FEV1 (the clinical markers of ABPA).
The patients carrying either one or both of GCT and AGG alleles of SP-A2 and patients with A allele at position 1011 of MBL had markedly higher eosinophilia, total IgE antibodies and lower FEV1 (the clinical markers of ABPA).
sph1- and spa2-deleted cells possess defects in mating projection morphology and pseudohyphal growth.
sph1(Delta) spa2(Delta) double mutants also exhibit a strong haploid invasive growth defect and an exacerbated mating projection defect relative to either sph1(Delta) or spa2(Delta) single mutants.
SPH1, which is similar to SPA2, is required for bipolar budding and plays a role in shmoo formation.
Outcomes were best in patients with ovarian cancer (MS 15.9 months) and colorectal cancer (MS 14.3 months) and worst in patients with lung (MS 2.4 months) and pancreas (MS 1.9 months) cancers.
This study was undertaken to evaluate the effect of ADAM8 on the proliferation and apoptosis of hepatocytes and hepatoma carcinoma cells during hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) progression.
In conclusion, our study suggested that ADAM8 could promote the proliferation of normal hepatocytes and render hepatoma carcinoma cells more resistant to apoptosis to play important roles during the progression of HCC.
Thus, our data integrate ADAM8 in pancreatic cancer signalling and validate ADAM8 as a target for PDAC therapy.
This study focuses on investigating the concrete role of a disintegrin and metalloproteinase 8 (ADAM8) in the progression of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
However, no studies have examined ADAM8 association in colorectal cancer (CRC).
Subgroup analysis showed that 5-year OS of colon cancer, T3-T4 stage and N0 stage was worse for patients with ADAM8-positive tumors than those with ADAM8-negative tumors (p &lt; 0.05).
The 5-year DFS in colon cancer, T3-T4 stage, N0 stage, TNM stage II, adenocarcinoma, moderate differentiation and male patient subgroups was also worse for patients with ADAM8-positive tumors than those with ADAM8-negative tumors (p &lt; 0.05).
The aim of this study was to examine the role of the inflammatory cells in the invasion of pancreatic cancer cells, focusing on the involvement of a disintegrin and metalloproteinase 8 (ADAM8) and matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP9) proteins.
ADAM8 expression is associated with worse survival of pancreatic cancer patients.
Anti-inflammatory macrophages increase pancreatic cancer cell migration rate in basement membrane matrix by inducing ADAM8 and MMP9 expression in cancer cells, thereby possibly enhancing the invasiveness of cancer.
In this study,we investigated the ADAM8 expression in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and its correlation with clinicopathologic features,including the survival of patients with HCC.
Other studies have demonstrated overexpression of some ADAM family proteins in a variety of human tumors, but no report is available on the actual expression of ADAM8 and the correlation between clinicopathologic features and prognosis of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) patients.
To evaluate the association between ADAM8 tissue expression and patient prognosis in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
Some of the previously reported gout associated loci (except ALDH16A1), including ABCG2, SLC2A9, GCKR, ALDH2 and CNIH2, were replicated.
The aim of this study was to examine the role of SLC2A9 and ABCG2 variants in tophaceous disease in people with gout.
The main objective of this study is to elucidate the clinical significance of the SLC2A9/GLUT9 rs11722228 polymorphism among male gout patients.
The genotypic frequencies of SLC2A9/GLUT9 rs1172228 did not differ significantly between the gout cases and the healthy controls.
The genotypic distribution of SLC2A9/GLUT9 rs1172228 in male gout patients did not differ significantly from that of healthy male controls.
The relationship between the SLC2A9 (solute carrier family 2, member 9) gene polymorphisms and gout was still inconsistent among the individual genetic association studies.
Therefore, this present research was aimed to systematically evaluate the association between SLC2A9 gene polymorphisms and gout susceptibility.
This study demonstrated that the genetic susceptibility for gout is associated with the SLC2A9 gene polymorphisms.
Eight variants of ABCG2, SLC2A9, SLC22A12, SLC22A11 and SLC17A3 were genotyped in male individuals in a case-control study with 157 gout (33% tophi), 106 asymptomatic hyperuricaemia and 295 control subjects from Taiwan.
ABCG2 Q141K (T), SLC2A9 rs1014290 (A) and SLC22A12 rs475688 (C) under an additive model and alcohol use independently predicted the risk of gout (respective odds ratio for each factor=2.48, 2.03, 1.95 and 2.48).
The aim of this study was to determine whether polymorphisms in solute carrier family 2 and facilitated glucose transporter member 9 (SLC2A9) are associated with susceptibility to gout.
A meta-analysis was conducted on associations between the rs12510549, rs16890979, and rs1014290 polymorphisms of SLC2A9 and gout susceptibility using fixed and random effects models.
This meta-analysis shows that the rs12510549, rs16890979, and rs1014290 polymorphisms of SLC2A9 protect against the development of gout in Caucasians and/or Asians.
We investigated the association of polymorphisms in the ABCG2 and SLC2A9 genes with gout in Korean patients and healthy individuals.
We demonstrated a significant association between rs2231142 in the ABCG2 gene and gout and identified novel SNPs, c.881A&gt;G and c.1002+78G&gt;A, in the SLC2A9 gene that may be associated with gout in a Korean population.
SLC2A9 and ZNF518B may play a role in gout progression in different populations, but no studies have focused on the Tibetan Chinese population.
We detected 6 single nucleotide polymorphisms in SLC2A9 and ZNF518B in 319 Chinese Tibetan gout patients.
Polymorphisms in SLC2A9 and ZNF518B affected multiple risk factors related to gout development.
This study is the first to investigate and identify positive correlations between SLC2A9 and ZNF518B gene polymorphisms and metabolic indices in Tibetan gout patients.
In conclusion, two patients who developed hypercalcemia associated with bone metastasis after surgery for HCC were treated with alendronate and they experienced alleviation of the pain due to bone metastasis, improvement of their quality of life and a marked decrease in AFP levels with tumor regression.
Coloboma-like optic discs might be an additional feature observed in patients with SPTAN1 mutations.
A newly described autoantibody to alpha-fodrin found in other neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's, further implicate a role for autoimmunity and the neurodegenerative processes in glaucoma.
In a similar experiment, ocular hypertension was induced in four eyes pre-treated with an intravitreal injection of AAV-BIRC4 to assess alpha-fodrin cleavage.
Comparison of the Zrs z-scores between the healthy children and the health groups found significant differences in children with asthma, current wheeze and respiratory symptoms, but not in children born preterm or with early-life wheeze.
The aim of this retrospective study was to assess responses to a bronchodilator by forced oscillation technique (FOT) and to relate the results of respiratory impedance (Zrs) to spirometric parameters in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
The diagnostic efficiency of Zrs, R5 and X35 when diagnosis asthma, expressed by ROC curve parameters, was as follows: AUC (0.721, 0.710, 0.695), sensitivity (62%, 72%, 53%) and specificity (72%, 61%, 76%), respectively.
And R5, X35 and Zrs may provide useful IOS parameters for asthma.
Birth weight less than 3,000 g was associated with larger exercise-induced changes in Zrs and Rrs at 5 Hz, and in reactance (Xrs) at 5 Hz, than those with birth weight more than 3,000 g. Preliminary evidence was found that obesity may be associated with airway obstruction, but not with bronchial hyper-reactivity.
To investigate the nature of mutations in exons 4 and 5 of the uromodulin (UM) gene, including in the area encoding the domain of 8 cysteines (D8C), in patients with multiple myeloma (MM) with the secretion of monoclonal light chains (LC) in cast nephropathy (CN) and without kidney injury.
The aim of the study was to investigate the association of the uromodulin (UMOD) genotype with patient health status and with renal cell carcinoma (RCC) aggressiveness.
In patients diagnosed with renal cell carcinoma and treated with surgery, uromodulin homozygous genotype is associated with more aggressive renal cell carcinoma clinical and pathological characteristics.
CYP11B2 was sequenced if the aldosterone level was high (primary aldosteronism phenotype); SCNN1B, NEDD4L, GRK4, UMOD, and NPPA genes were sequenced if the aldosterone level was low (Liddle phenotype).
MT1F, MT1G, MT1X, and MT2A gene expression was significantly downregulated in colon cancer tissue (p&lt;0.05).
Here, we describe the discovery of a new MSI marker for colorectal cancer located in the 3'-untranslated region (3'UTR, T20 mononucleotide repeat) of the metallothionein 1X gene (MT1XT20).
Indeed, MT1XT20 instability was detected in 36 out of 37 cases (97.3%) of MSI-high colorectal cancers, whereas no MT1XT20 alterations were observed in 254 MSS or in 46 MSI-low cases.
HNF-1Beta regulates tissue-specific gene expression in endometriosis, as well as the expression of several genes, including CD44v9, which binds several molecules, including hyaluronan, epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), leukemia-associated Rho-guanine nucleotide exchange factor (LARG), IQ motif containing GTPase activating protein 1 (IQGAP1), macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF), major histocompatibility complex, class II invariant chain (CD74), cystine transporter subunit (xCT), Fas and extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins.
We sought to determine whether oxidative stress or a relative deficit of l-arginine plays a role in reducing cutaneous vasodilation in response to local heating in chronic kidney disease (CKD).
Eight patients with stage 3-4 CKD and eight age- and sex-matched healthy control (HC) subjects were instrumented with four microdialysis (MD) fibers for the local delivery of 1) Ringers solution (R), 2) 20 mM ascorbic acid (AA), 3) 10 mM l-arginine (l-Arg), and 4) 10 mM N(G)-nitro-l-arginine methyl ester (l-NAME).
The plateau %CVC(max) in the CKD group was significantly greater at the AA and l-Arg sites compared with R (AA: 89 +/- 2; l-Arg: 90 +/- 1; R: 76 +/- 4; P &lt; 0.05) and did not differ from HC.
Initial peak %CVC(max) was also significantly attenuated at the R and l-Arg sites in CKD (P &lt; 0.05) but did not differ at the AA site.
These results suggest that cutaneous microvascular function is impaired in stage 3-4 CKD and that oxidative stress and a deficit of l-arginine play a role in this impairment.
If true, plasma L-arg should be severely reduced in chronic renal failure (CRF); however, plasma L-arg is frequently unchanged in CRF.
l-arg, by its cytoprotective effect, maintained the thiol status, thereby preserving the activities of the membrane bound ATPases and preventing proteinuria and subsequent weight loss in EG-treated rats.
As expected, a physiological analgesia is produced by administration of inhibitors, especially kelatorphan and analogues, demonstrating unambiguously the implication of enkephalinase and aminopeptidase M in enkephalin metabolism.
Associated with antigliadin and anti-HSP antibodies, children with autism and patients with autoimmune disease developed anti-dipeptidylpeptidase I (DPP I), anti-dipeptidylpeptidase IV (DPP IV [or CD26]) and anti-aminopeptidase N (CD13) autoantibodies.
We therefore investigated plasma ApN in anorexia nervosa (AN).
The observed ocular comorbidities included nystagmus (36.7%, 18/49), vitreous opacity (28.6%, 14/49), foveal hypoplasia (20.4%, 10/49), ametropia (12.2%, 6/49), exotropia (12.2%, 6/49), congenital glaucoma (12.2%, 6/49), esotropia (4.1%, 2/49), congenital ptosis (4.1%, 2/49), lens ectopia (4.1%, 2/49), scleral staphyloma (2.0%, 1/49) and pigmentary degeneration of retina (2.0%, 1/49).
The common eye disorders for which genetic testing is commonly requested are briefly discussed - anophthalmia, microphthalmia, coloboma, anterior segment dysgenesis, corneal dystrophies, cataracts, optic atrophy, congenital glaucoma, congenital amaurosis, retinitis pigmentosa, color blindness, juvenile retinoshisis, retinoblastoma etc.
The anatomical causes of blindness include optic nerve disorders in 75 (24.8%) cases, retinal disorders in 55 (18.2%), corneal disorders in 47 (15.6%), lens-related disorders in 39 (12.9%), congenital anomalies in 11 (3.6%), and congenital glaucoma in 20 (6.6%) cases.
Among conditions causing blindness, optic atrophy seen in 73 (24.17%) cases was the most common, followed by retinal dystrophy in 44 (14.56%), corneal scarring in 35 (11.59%), cataract in 22 (7.28%), and congenital glaucoma in 20 (6.6%) cases.
Other abnormalities included vitreous hemorrhage (n=1), congenital glaucoma (n=2), uveal coloboma (n=2), retinopathy mimicking retinopathy of prematurity (n=2), and cystic fovea (n=3).
Primary congenital glaucoma (PCG) is isolated, non-syndromic glaucoma that occurs in the first three years of life and is a major cause of childhood blindness.
The purpose of the present study is to investigate the association between the polymorphisms in AXIN1 with susceptibility to clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC).
In both cultured melanoma cell lines and in vivo in melanoma cell-derived tumor xenografts, 1-benzyl-I3C disrupted canonical Wnt/Beta-catenin signaling that resulted in the down regulation of Beta-catenin protein levels with a concomitant increase in levels of the Beta-catenin destruction complex components GSK3Beta and Axin.
Here, we showed that SKL2001, which has been identified as an activator for Wnt signaling by disrupting the Axin/Beta-Catenin complex, negatively regulates growth of colon cancer spheroids cultured in the 3D condition that simulates tumor microenvironment in vivo.
Defective lysosomal function defines many neurodegenerative diseases, such as neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCL) and Niemann-Pick type C (NPC), and is implicated in Alzheimer's disease (AD) and frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD-TDP) with progranulin (PGRN) deficiency.
Moreover, recent findings indicate that Grn mutations are associated with other neurodegenerative disorders with tau pathology, including Alzheimer's disease.
Together, these critical roles in the CNS suggest that PGRN has the potential to be an important therapeutic target for the treatment of various neurodegenerative disorders, particularly Alzheimer's disease (AD).
Pathological examination revealed Alzheimer's disease in three cases (all LPA), pathological PSP in two cases (one clinical PSP and one PNFA) and corticobasal degeneration in one case (PNFA).
Granulin mutations were initially found in tau-negative patients, though recent findings indicate that these mutations are associated with other neurodegenerative disorders with tau pathology, including Alzheimer's disease and corticobasal degeneration.
Inter-individual variation in CCAAT/enhancer binding protein gamma (CEBPG) transcript expression in normal human bronchial epithelial cells (NBEC) is associated with predisposition to lung cancer.
These data support the hypothesis that genetic variation in linkage disequilibrium with rs2772 influences regulation of CEBPG transcript expression through a trans-effect downstream of RNA polymerase II transcription and confirm that cis-acting genetic variation contributes to inter-individual variation in CEBPG transcript expression in NBEC, which is associated with variation in lung cancer risk.
In an effort to develop a biomarker for lung cancer risk, we evaluated the transcript expressions of 14 antioxidant, DNA repair, and transcription factor genes in normal bronchial epithelial cells (HUGO names CAT, CEBPG, E2F1, ERCC4, ERCC5, GPX1, GPX3, GSTM3, GSTP1, GSTT1, GSTZ1, MGST1, SOD1, and XRCC1).
We sought to review English language research articles examining the presence, clinical significance, and/or pathophysiology of MM in Parkinson's disease (PD), corticobasal syndrome (CBS), essential tremor (ET), focal hand dystonia, Creutzfeldt-Jakob's disease (CJD), and Huntington's disease.
We report a patient that presented with the corticobasal syndrome (CBS), including progressive dementia, asymmetric parkinsonism associated with constructional and ideomotor apraxia, action myoclonus and focal hand dystonia.
Fifteen rearrangements detected in Sezary syndrome patients and SeAx resulted in an expression of new fusion transcripts, nine of them were in frame (EHD1-CAPN12, TMEM66-BAIAP2, MBD4-PTPRC, PTPRC-CPN2, MYB-MBNL1, TFG-GPR128, MAP4K3-FIGLA, DCP1A-CCL27, MBNL1-KIAA2018) and five resulted in ectopic expression of fragments of genes not expressed in normal T-cells (BAIAP2, CPN2, GPR128, CAPN12, FIGLA).
In addition, we found eleven potential cancer-related genes with mutations (EZH1, SPOP, NF1, TCF12, IGF2BP3, KMT2C, CNOT1, BRIP1, KDM5C, STAG2 and MAP4K3) that have not been reported in thyroid follicular tumors.
Since GLK (also named MAP4K3) induces activation of NF-KB, which contributes to tumor progression, we investigated the role of GLK in NSCLC.
GLK protein levels of 190 samples from pulmonary tissue arrays and 58 pulmonary resection samples from stage I to stage III NSCLC patients were studied using immunohistochemistry or immunoblotting.
High levels of GLK proteins were detected in pulmonary tissues from NSCLC patients.
Elevated GLK protein levels were correlated with increased recurrence risks and poor recurrence-free survival rates in NSCLC patients after adjusting for pathologic stage, smoking status, alcohol status, and EGFR levels.
Thus, GLK is a novel prognostic biomarker for NSCLC recurrence.
RNA fusion-based CISs were identified corresponding to both DNA-based CISs (Cdkn2a, Mycl1, Nf2, Pten, Sema6d, and Rere) and additional regions strongly associated with cancer that were not observed by LM-PCR (Myc, Akt1, Pth, Csf1r, Fgfr2, Wisp1, Map3k5, and Map4k3).
Computationally, PTPRF, PRKAR2B, MAP4K3, and RICTOR were calculated as highly drug-targetable genes for breast cancer.
In the GeparTrio FFPE training cohort, a significant linear correlation between TMSB15A expression and pCR was apparent in triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) (n=61, P=0.040).
In normal human prostate and prostate cancer tissues, TMSB15A was the predominant isoform expressed.
In contrast, normal colon and colon cancer tissue expressed predominantly TMSB15B.
Treatment of MCF-7 breast cancer cells with transforming growth factor beta 1 repressed TMSB15A expression but had no effect on TMSB15B.
siRNA specific to the TMSB15B isoform suppressed cell migration of prostate cancer cells to epidermal growth factor, suggesting a functional role for this second isoform.
We showed earlier that human beta-thymosin 15 (Tb15) is up-regulated in prostate cancer, confirming studies from others that propagated Tb15 as a prostate cancer biomarker.
Tb15r is present also in mouse prostate cancer cell lines.
In those patients with isolated adenopathy the following diagnoses were reached; sarcoidosis 23, TB 15, lymphoma 4, carcinoma 4, no diagnosis 1.
However, in this report we provide evidence that TbNB, initially identified in human neuroblastoma, is the only Tb isoform upregulated in human prostate cancer and that the Tb15 sequence is not present herein.
Human NB thymosin beta is a beta-thymosin originally found in neuroblastoma.
Our studies provide the first evidence that Upk1b is directly associated with the development of congenital anomalies of the urinary tract (CAKUT), spontaneous age-dependent hydronephrosis, and dysplastic urothelia.
Upk1b(RFP/RFP) mice developed age-dependent progressive hydronephrosis.
The aim of the present study was to investigate the role of serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine) in the rostral ventromedial medulla (RVM) and spinal cord in pain sensory abnormalities in a 6-hydroxydopamine-treated rat model of Parkinson's disease.
Conclusions These results suggest that the decreased 5-hydroxytryptamine contents in the rostral ventromedial medulla and spinal dorsal horn may be involved in hyperalgesia in the 6-hydroxydopamine-induced rat model of Parkinson's disease.
The role of serotonin7 (5-HT7) receptors in the regulation of depression is poorly understood, particularly in Parkinson's disease-associated depression.
The expression of 13 fibrosis-related microRNAs (miRNAs) (miR-20a, miR-21, miR-27a, miR-27b, miR-29a, miR-29c, miR-92a, miR-122, miR-146a, miR-155, miR-221, miR-222, and miR-224) was analyzed in 194 serums and 177 liver biopsies of patients with either CHB or CHC to develop models to diagnose advanced fibrosis and cirrhosis (Metavir F3-F4).
For this reason, the expression levels of 24 miRNA (let-7c, miR-92a-3p, 423-5p, 150-5p, 223-3p, 125b-5p, 342-3p, miR-206, 122-5p, 375, 223-5p, 10a-5p, 23b-5p, 99a-5p, 23a-5p, 10a-3p, 122-3p, 125b-1-3p, 23b-3p, 125b-2-3p, 23a-3p, 92a-1-5p, 92a-2-5p, 99a-3p) were analyzed in plasma of patients with chronic hepatitis B, HBV-positive cirrhosis and HBV-positive HCC and compared with control group samples.
Consistently, Bhlhb2 expression was significantly higher in PFC of ADHD model SHR than control.
We examined ANG expression in WTs, human fetal kidney (FK) and childhood kidney (NK) samples and studied its relationship with microvascular density (MVD) and with three other hypoxia-induced angiogenic factors: lactate dehydrogenase A (LDHA), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGFA) and BHLHE40 (basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor E40).
ANG, CD31, VEGFA and BHLHE40 mRNA levels were significantly lower in 15 WTs compared with matched-paired NKs.
Mutations in the SLC5A5 gene encoding NIS that result in a non-functional protein lead to congenital hypothyroidism due to I- transport defect (ITD).
Thyroid concentrates radioactive iodine by sodium-iodide symporter; this is used for treating hyperthyroidism and thyroid cancer.
In this study, we investigated the relationship between iodine content and sodium iodide symporter (NIS) expression by using the clinical specimens from patients with nodular goiter and explored the pathogenesis triggered by iodine deficiency in nodular goiter.
The same technique was used for the assays of the hepatic levels of FGF-21, silent information regulator (SIRT1), malondialdehyde (MDA),IL-10, tumor necrosis factor-Alfa (TNF-Alfa) as well as the apoptotic markers; caspase-3 and B-cell lymphoma (Bcl-2).
We report here the case of a 25-year-old woman with a bulbar onset ALS that progressed in less than 12 months to invasive ventilation due to respiratory failure; Genetic screening identified a new mutation in the FUS gene that lies within the last codon.
The expression and biological function of Grb2-associated binding 2 (Gab2) in renal cell carcinoma (RCC) cells was tested here.
However, the significance of Grb2 and Sos proteins, which is related to EGF-triggered Ras activation, has not been elucidated in human bladder cancer.
On the other hand, expression of Grb2 and Sos proteins was substantially increased in all human bladder cancer cell lines examined in comparison with cultured normal urothelial cells, whether codon 12 of H-ras was mutated or not.
These results suggest that the amplification of both Grb2 and SOS proteins plays an important role in the carcinogenesis of human bladder cancer.
In the 32 patients studied, bladder cancer was diagnosed as pTaG1-2 in 8 cases, pT1G2 in 6, pT1G3 in 7, pT2G2-3 in 7, pT3G2-3 in 3 and pT4 in 1 patient.
In this study, we investigated whether silencing Wnt2B expression could inhibit the invasiveness of ovarian cancer cells and reduce drug resistance.
These data suggest that Wnt2B indeed plays an important role in ovarian cancer metastasis and drug resistance.
WNT2B is expressed in several types of human cancer, such as basal cell carcinoma, gastric cancer, breast cancer, head/neck squamous cell carcinoma, cervical cancer and leukemia.
Among various cancer cell lines, the Wnt-13 mRNA was detected in HeLa (cervical cancer), MKN28 and MKN74 (gastric cancer).
The receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase PTPRG has been genetically associated with psychiatric disorders and is a ligand for members of the contactin family, which are themselves linked to autism spectrum disorders.
Based on our finding of a phosphatase-null de novo mutation in PTPRG associated with a case of sporadic schizophrenia, we used PTPRG knockout (KO) mice to model the effect of a loss-of-function mutation.
The most notable behavioral consequences of PTPRG gene inactivation were reduced immobilization in the forced swim test, suggestive of some negative symptoms of schizophrenia.
The subgroups significantly differed in important features, including specific working memory deficits for PTPRG (n=5); severe negative symptoms, global cognitive deficits and poor educational attainment, suggesting a developmental disorder, for SLC39A13 (n=4); slow processing speed, childhood attention deficit disorder and milder symptoms for TGM5 (n=4); and global cognitive deficits with good educational attainment suggesting neurodegeneration for ARMS/KIDINS220 (n=5).
First, whole exome sequencing was conducted to identify disruptive de novo mutations in 14 complete parent-offspring trios with sporadic schizophrenia from Jerusalem, which identified 5 sporadic cases with de novo gene mutations in 5 different genes (PTPRG, TGM5, SLC39A13, BTK, CDKN3).
Next, targeted exome capture of these genes was conducted in 48 well-characterized, unrelated, ethnically diverse schizophrenia cases, recruited and characterized by the same research team in New York (NY sample), which demonstrated extremely rare and potentially damaging variants in three of the five genes (MAF&lt;0.01) in 12/48 cases (25%); including PTPRG (5 cases), SCL39A13 (4 cases) and TGM5 (4 cases), a higher number than usually identified by whole exome sequencing.
Activated astrocytes were found to be strongly positive for RPTPGamma also in a mice model of Alzheimer's disease.
Aqueous humor (AH) samples from 14 patients with presumed tuberculous uveitis (PTU), and 30 control patients were assayed for the proinflammatory cytokines interleukin IL-4, IL-12, IL-15, IL-17, interferon (IFN)-Gamma, and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-Alfa, the immunosuppressive cytokine IL-10, and the chemokines GRO-Alfa/CXCL1, IL-8/CXCL8, MIG/CXCL9, IP-10/CXCL10 and SDF-1/CXCL12 with the use of a multiplex assay.
Aqueous humor (AH) samples from patients with Behcet's disease (BD) (n=29), Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada (VKH) disease (n=21), and HLA-B27-associated uveitis (n=8), and 42 control patients were assayed for the neutrophil chemoattractants CXCL1/GRO-Alfa and CXCL8/IL-8 and the lymphocyte chemoattractants CXCL9/MIG, CXCL10/IP-10 and CXCL12/SDF-1 with the use of a multiplex chemokine assay.
In patients with the same disease activity, AH levels of GRO-Alfa and IP-10 were significantly higher in patients with BD than in patients with VKH disease and HLA-B27-associated uveitis (p=0.0474; p&lt;0.001, respectively).
These data suggest that GRO-Alfa and IP-10 are the predominant CXC chemokines involved in neutrophil and activated T lymphocyte chemoattraction in endogenous uveitis, particularly in BD.
The purpose of this study was to investigate the role and regulation of the CXC chemokine GRO and the interaction between GRO and IL-8 in LPS-induced uveitis in rabbits.
Taken together, our results suggest that GRO is an essential mediator for neutrophil infiltration in LPS-induced uveitis in rabbits.
Na(+)K(+)ATPase, NKCC1, and alpha-syntrophin were expressed within sensory epithelia and were unaltered in Meniere's disease specimens.
Although an elevated hemoglobin A1c (HbAc1) level is an independent predictor of worse survival in patients with both digestive cancer and diabetes mellitus, its relationship to short-term prognosis in these patients has not been addressed.
We identified novel driver mutations that developed during adenoma and cancer evolution, particularly in OR1B1 (GPCR signaling pathway) for adenoma evolution, and LAMA1 (PI3K-Akt signaling pathway) and ADCY3 (FGFR signaling pathway) for CRC evolution.
Recently, we provided human validation for a cooperating oncogenic role for cAMP in brain tumorigenesis when we found that SNPs in ADCY8 were correlated with glioma (brain tumor) risk in individuals with Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1).
However, the cAMP pathway is well-known to be sexually dimorphic, and SNPs in ADCY8 affected glioma risk in a sex-specific fashion, elevating the risk for females while protecting males.
Here, we report genetic polymorphisms in the human adenylate cyclase gene adenylate cyclase 8 (ADCY8) that correlate with glioma risk in NF1 in a sex-specific manner, elevating risk in females while reducing risk in males.
Overall, our results establish a sex-specific role for cAMP regulation in human gliomagenesis, specifically identifying ADCY8 as a modifier of glioma risk in NF1.
The effect of insulin on the oxidative desaturation of 1-14C palmitic acid to palmitoleic acid (delta 9 desaturase) 1-14C linoleic acid to alpha-linolenic acid (delta 6 desaturase) on rat liver microsomes and 1-14C eicosa-8,11,14-trienoic acid to arachidonic acid (delta 5 desaturase) on rat liver microsomes and hepatoma tissue culture (HTC) cells was studied.
Methylation of CALCA, CDH1, DAPK1, and EVX2 was more common in squamous cell carcinomas (SCC) compared to adenocarcinomas (ADC).
Overall, CALCA, DAPK, ESR1, TIMP3, APC and RAR-beta2 promoters were significantly more often hypermethylated in cancers than in controls, while adenocarcinomas were more often hypermethylated above the highest control ratio for APC, TIMP3 and RASSF1A promoters.
Combining 4 genes (CALCA, DAPK, ESR1 and APC) yielded a sensitivity of 89% (with all adenocarcinomas identified), equal to cytomorphology (89%) and high-risk human papilloma virus (Hr-HPV; 90%).
The thyroid tumor was diagnosed as metastasis to the thyroid from lung adenocarcinoma, because it showed mucin production, positive immunoreactivity for carcinoembryonic antigen and negative immunoreactivities for thyroglobulin and calcitonin.
We searched Medline for clinical trials that assessed disease-modifying drugs for relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis published from Sept 1, 2008, to Oct 31, 2012.
SEPT1, SEPT4, and SEPT2 have been found in deposits known as neurofibrillary tangles and glial fibrils in Alzheimer's disease.
Finally, we evaluated the effect of the pro-arousal neuropeptides CRF and Hcrt-1/Ox-A in NPSR-deficient mice.
The administration of CRF and Hcrt-1/Ox-A, two classic pro-arousal peptides, elicited the same effects in both NPSR(-/-) and wild type mice, ruling out the possibility that adaptive mechanisms occurring at the level of these two systems could have occurred during NPSR(-/-) development to compensate for the lack of NPSR receptors.
Moreover, we demonstrated that the deletion of NPSR did not lead to compensatory changes in the vigilance-promoting effects of the CRF and Hcrt-1/Ox-A systems.
We included all RCTs of any calcimimetic agent, cinacalcet HCl (AMG-073, Sensipar), NPS R-467 or NPS R-568 administered to patients with CKD for the treatment of SHPT.
Renal osteodystrophy (RO) due to secondary hyperparathyroidism (HPT) in chronic renal failure was an obvious target for studying the effects of NPS R-568.
Changes in BIS (bispectral index) VISTA bilateral monitoring system associated with intraoperative episodes of generalized and focal seizures, during total intravenous anesthesia for resection of a left frontal parasagittal meningioma, are herein described.
Previous studies identified a variety of putative target genes from several pathways associated with DNA damage repair, chromatin remodeling complex, PI3K-AKT-mTOR signaling, Notch signaling, cell cycle checkpoint signaling, BRCA-associated complex and Fanconi's anemia susceptibility genes that could be used as biomarkers or therapeutic targets for PARP inhibition.
Hematologic toxicities, including neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, and anemia, are major adverse effects of PARP inhibitors (PARPis), but the incidence rate and overall risk has not been systematically studied.
A total of 2,479 patients from 12 RCTs revealed that the incidence of PARPi-associated severe hematologic toxicities was, respectively: neutropenia: 32.9% (95% CI, 20.5%-48.3%); thrombocytopenia: 15.9% (95% CI, 9.5%-25.4%), and anemia: 9.1% (95% CI, 5.1%-15.7%).
Examples of endocrine syndromes are classical carcinoid syndrome caused by serotonin (measured in the urine as its metabolite 5-HIAA), insulinoma syndrome caused by insulin or proinsulin, Zollinger-Ellison syndrome resulting from gastrin secretion, glucagonoma syndrome caused by glucagon, WDHA syndrome caused by vasoactive intestinal peptide, or Cushing's syndrome resulting from ectopic production of adrenocorticotropic hormone or corticotropin-releasing hormone.
We have previously reported and confirmed that vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) is a significant stimulator of ACTH and cortisol secretion in at least some patients with Cushing's disease.
We have also found that the hormonal responses to corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) in VIP-responsive patients with Cushing's disease were higher than those in VIP non-responders, which suggested a linkage between the actions of CRH and VIP in this disorder.
This study is the first to demonstrate the parallel inhibition by DEX of ACTH and cortisol responses to CRH and VIP in Cushing's disease.
Of the patients with Cushing's disease, 9 (75%) were responsive to hCRH, 5 (42%) were to VIP, and 3 (25%) were to PHM, showing significant increases in both ACTH and cortisol.
In addition, in the patients with Cushing's disease the coadministration of hCRH with PHM or VIP produced additive increases in both ACTH and cortisol.
Abnormalities in hypothalamic-pituitary adrenal axis function were demonstrated by measuring plasma adrenocorticotropin abnormal concentrations following Vasoactive Intestinal Peptide (VIP) and Corticotropin Releasing Hormone (CRH) administration during a phase of remission of Cushing's disease in a 45-year-old female patient.
We conclude that the study of ACTH and cortisol response to VIP and CRH may be useful in revealing Cushing's disease even during a remission phase of the disorder.
Here we introduce a cell culture model of EAD propagation consisting of monolayers of cultured neonatal rat ventricular myocytes treated with anthopleurin-A (AP-A).
The present study provides evidence in support of the hypothesis that AP-A-induced ventricular tachyarrhythmias are due to bradycardia-dependent EAD and triggered activity.
TU alternans was investigated by MAP recordings in six normal dogs, following the administration of anthopleurin-A (AP-A), a drug shown to delay sodium inactivation and to induce bradycardia dependent long QTU, EADs, and TdP.
Moreover, a series of recent studies have genetically and functionally linked kalirin signaling to several disorders, including schizophrenia and Alzheimer's disease.
A series of recent studies has improved our understanding of spine dynamics by establishing kalirin-7 as an important regulator of dendritic spine development as well as structural and functional plasticity, providing a model for the molecular control of structural plasticity and implicating kalirin-7 in synaptic pathology in several disorders including schizophrenia and Alzheimer's disease.
Here, we report that inhibition of the cell cycle-dependent kinase 9 (Cdk9) by RNA interference, or the compound flavopiridol, blocked infections with HAdV-C2/5, EKC-causing HAdV-D8/37, and progeny formation in human corneal epithelial and cancer cells.
The study identifies Cdk9 as a postexposure drug target against adenovirus infections in vitro and suggests that the clinically tested anticancer drug flavopiridol is a candidate for treating adenoviral EKC or adenovirus emergence upon immune suppression.
We conclude that: 1) synthetic non-thiazolidinediones can serve as ligands of PPARgamma and PPARdelta; 2) ligand-dependent activation of PPARdelta involves an apparent conformational change and association of the receptor ligand binding domain with CREB-binding protein; 3) PPARgamma activation (but not PPARdelta or PPARalpha activation) is sufficient to potentiate preadipocyte differentiation; 4) non-thiazolidinedione PPARgamma agonists improve hyperglycemia and hypertriglyceridemia in vivo; 5) although PPARalpha activation is sufficient to affect triglyceride metabolism, PPARdelta activation does not appear to modulate glucose or triglyceride levels.
At present, four loci associated with non-syndromic auditory neuropathy have been mapped: Autosomal recessive deafness-9 [DFNB9; the otoferlin (OTOF) gene] and autosomal recessive deafness-59 [DFNB59; the pejvakin (PJVK) gene], associated with autosomal recessive inheritance; the autosomal dominant auditory neuropathy gene [AUNA1; the diaphanous-3 (DIAPH3) gene]; and AUNX1, linked to chromosome X.
Presence of antibodies to carbamylated fetal calf serum (CarP-FCS) and fibrinogen (CarP-Fib) was determined by inhouse ELISAs among RA cases in the Leiden Early Arthritis Clinic (n=846) and in the Swedish Epidemiological Investigation of Rheumatoid Arthritis (n=1985) cohorts.
To detect the antibodies against human fibrinogen (FIB) Beta67-77 peptide and citrullinated human FIB Beta67-77 peptide in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and examine their diagnostic values in RA.
Polymyositis/dermatomyositis, systemic lupus erythematosus and Addison's disease, three conditions regulated by the HLA-B8-DR3 haplotype, were most strongly associated with MG, especially early-onset disease.
The prevalence of sporadic inclusion body myositis (sIBM) was correlated with the frequency of HLA-DR3.
The B8-DR3 haplotype fragment conferred the strongest susceptibility (OR 2.9, 95% CI 1.8-4.6), and the B-DR region of other ancestral haplotypes was associated with myositis subgroups.
Most gastric IFPs were associated with chronic atrophic gastritis while only one ileal polyp was associated with Meckels diverticulum.
CBR1, DYRK1A, HMGN1, ITSN1, RCAN1, SON, TMEM50B, and TTC3 were each up-regulated two-fold in Down syndrome samples compared to normal samples; of these, SON and TTC3 were newly reported.
In this report we show that high levels of the TTC3 protein, encoded by one of the genes of the Down Syndrome Critical Region (DCR), prevent neurite extension and disrupt Golgi compactness in differentiating primary neurons.
TTC3 contains a canonical RING finger motif, a pair of tetratricopeptide motifs, a putative Akt phosphorylation site, and nuclear localization signals, and is encoded by a gene within the Down syndrome (DS) critical region on chromosome 21.
Nonchimeric polytransgenic 152F7 mice encompassing four human chromosome 21 genes (DSCR3, DSCR5, TTC3, and DYRK1A) within the Down syndrome critical region present with learning and memory impairment.
Multivariate regression analysis revealed that plasma VWF Ag level is an independent predictor of mortality in ARDS pediatric patients.
Plasma VWF Ag level is an excellent predictive marker for outcome in children with ALI/ARDS.
In the multicenter study, patients with direct ARDS also had lower levels of von Willebrand factor antigen and IL-6 and IL-8, markers of endothelial injury and inflammation, respectively.
To investigate the role of endothelial cell mediators, E-selectin (ES), intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1), tissue factor (TF), and von Willebrand factor (vWF), in the early phase of severe acute pancreatitis (SAP) complicated with respiratory failure [pancreatitis-associated lung injury (PALI)].
Thus, CLC-2 may be a promising and potential novel therapeutic strategy for combating primary open-angle glaucoma.
To determine the effects of bariatric surgery on albuminuria in obese patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Retrospective analyses of clinical records of obese patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus who had either micro- or macroalbuminuria and had undergone various bariatric surgery were retrieved from a local hospital database.
Of the 46 subjects with type 2 diabetes mellitus, 15 subjects had diabetic nephropathy and had pre- and post-bariatric surgery urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio or urine protein-to-creatinine ratio data available for analysis; 13 out of the 15 subjects (86.7%) showed improvement of urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio or urine protein-to-creatinine ratio after surgery; 2 showed equivocal results; 9 of 13 subjects (69.2%) showed remission of diabetic nephropathy; 7 of these 9 patients had microalbuminuria before surgery, 2 had macroalbuminuria before surgery.
In type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) patients, chronic kidney disease (CKD) progression may occur without detectable changes in urinary albumin excretion (UAE) rate.
To investigate, for the first time, the impact of systolic pulmonary arterial pressure (PASP) on maximal exercise capacity in adults with mild-to-moderate cystic fibrosis, without PH at rest.
Assays of carboxypeptidase B-like activity and C3 in serum from patients with cystic fibrosis and appropriate control subjects failed to demonstrate a deficiency of carboxypeptidase B-like activity or a consistent increase in C3, as was suggested by Conover and associates.
Differences between men and women with cystic fibrosis were apparent, in that women with cystic fibrosis had higher concentrations of both serum carboxypeptidase B-like activity and C3 than either men with cystic fibrosis or control subjects.
The properties and lysosomal distribution of the enzyme indicated that it was a carboxypeptidase B. Substrate affinity, thermolability, pH stability, the fall and rise in activity with subculture, the cyclical pattern of activity through serial passage and the level of activity were similar for the control and cystic fibrosis enzyme.
In this review the roles identified for different selenoproteins in these steps and how they may promote or inhibit metastatic cancers is discussed.
Indeed, many selenoproteins have antioxidant activity which can attenuate cancer development by minimizing oxidative insult and resultant DNA damage.
In this review, we discuss what is currently known about selenoproteins in tumorigenesis with a focus on their contextual roles in cancer development, growth, and progression.
New aspects of Se actions in breast cancer have emerged such as the impact of genetic polymorphisms on Se metabolism and response, new functions of selenoproteins, epigenetic modulation of gene expression, and long-term influence of early-life exposure on disease risk.
We observed that both SelS and C99 were colocalized in the membrane fraction of mouse neuroblastoma Neuro2a (N2a) cells.
The results suggest that decreased NPY expression in the extended amygdala might be causally linked with the depression induced following type 2 diabetes and that the antidepressant action of imipramine in diabetic mice might be mediated by NPY-NPY Y1 receptor system.
Numerous models of obesity and diabetes are characterized by increased central nervous system (CNS) neuropeptide Y (NPY); in fact, a single intracerebroventricular (icv) administration of NPY in lean fasted rats elevates hepatic VLDL-TG secretion and does so, in large part, via signaling through the CNS NPY Y1 receptor.
We investigated whether annexin A8 (A-A8), a Ca-binding protein overexpressed in pancreatic cancer, plays a role in cell growth and migration and investigated its association with pancreatic cancer prognosis.
Although Annexin A8 (ANXA8), a member of a superfamily of calcium and phospholipid binding proteins, is physiologically expressed in a tissue-specific manner, recent microarray studies reported that ANXA8 was also ectopically expressed in pancreatic cancers.
We investigated the molecular mechanism of expression of ANXA8 in cancer cells and its functional role in pancreatic cancer cells.
To investigate the utility of 26 immunohistochemical markers (CAM 5.2, CK [cytokeratin] 7, CK20, CK17, CK19, MUC1, MUC2, MUC4, MUC5AC, MUC6, p53, DPC4/SMAD4, CDX2, pVHL [von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor gene protein], S100P, IMP-3 [insulin-like growth factor 2 messenger RNA binding protein 3], maspin, mesothelin, claudin 4, claudin 18, annexin A8, fascin, PSCA [prostate stem cell antigen], MOC31, CEA [carcinoembryonic antigen], and CA19-9 [cancer antigen 19-9]) in the diagnosis of ductal adenocarcinoma of the pancreas.
Claudin 18 and annexin A8 are frequently highly overexpressed in infiltrating ductal adenocarcinomas when compared with normal reactive ducts, suggesting a role for these molecules in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas.
Multivariate analysis further confirmed that miR-340-low/ROCK1-high expression was an independent prognostic factor of unfavorable survival in pediatric osteosarcoma (for overall survival: p = 0.006, for progression-free survival: p = 0.008).
Our data offer convincing evidence, for the first time, that the combined miR-340 downregulation and ROCK1 upregulation may be linked to tumor progression and adverse prognosis in pediatric osteosarcoma.
We analyzed the effects of 3 war components-combat exposure (CES), observation of abusive violence (OBS), and participation in abusive violence (PARTC)-and sense of coherence (SOC) on the development of both posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and depression among a sample of war veterans.
The expression levels of miR-155 in 38 pairs of cancer tissues and adjacent normal tissues from breast cancer patients were detected using quantitative real-time PCR.
Soft agar colony formation assay and tumor xenografts showed inhibition of miR-155 could significantly reduce proliferation of cancer cells in vivo and vitro, which confirmed that miR-155 is an effective therapeutic target of breast cancer.
Our results underscore the importance of miR-155 as a therapeutic target and combination of Doxorubicinol and miR-155-silencing would be a potential way to cure breast cancer.
We have quantified expression of seven oncomiRs, namely miR-17/92 cluster (miR-17, miR-18a, miR-19a and miR-20a), miR-21, miR-27a and miR-155, in plasma of 137 breast cancer (BC) patients.
Our results suggested that MIAT acted as a competing endogenous RNA (ceRNA) to regulate the expression of dual specificity phosphatase 7 (DUSP7) by taking up miR-155-5p in breast cancer.
We conclude that MIAT promotes breast cancer progression and functions as ceRNA to regulate DUSP7 expression by sponging miR-155-5p in breast cancer.
Four oncogenic microRNAs (miR-155, miR-19a, miR-181b, and miR-24) and one tumor suppressor microRNA (let-7a) were shown to differentiate between high- and low-risk early breast cancer (EBC) and reflect the surgical tumor removal and adjuvant therapy.
The present study determined the role of postoperative wound fluids (WFs) from patients diagnosed with breast cancer subsequent to breast conserving surgery or breast conserving surgery followed by IORT on the expression of three microRNAs (miRNAs), consisting of miR-21, miR-155 and miR-221, in distinct breast cancer cell lines that represent the general subtypes of breast cancer.
Additionally, it was indicated that both WFs and RT-WF strongly downregulated the expression of miR-21, miR-155 and miR-221 in basal/epithelial and luminal subtypes of breast cancer.
The expression of three different microRNAs (miR-9, miR-21, and miR-155) in 52 formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) primary cervical cancer tissue samples and 50 FFPE normal cervical tissue samples were evaluated.
MiR-9, miR-21, and miR-155 were significantly overexpressed in cervical cancer tissues compared to normal tissues (P &lt; 0.001).
MiR-21 and miR-155 expression combined with the HPV E6/E7 mRNA assay in HPV E6/E7 negative cervical cancer showed increased AUC of 0.7267 and 0.7000, respectively (P = 0.01, P = 0.04), demonstrating their potential as diagnostic tools.
Moreover, miR-21 and miR-155 were predictors showing a 7 fold and 10.3 fold higher risk for HPV E6/E7 negative patients with cervical cancer (P = 0.024 and P = 0.017, respectively) while miR-155 was a predictor showing a 27.9 fold higher risk for HPV E6/E7 positive patients with cervical cancer (P &lt; 0.0001).
MiR-21 and miR-155 may be helpful in the prediction of both HPV positive and HPV negative cases of cervical cancer.
The purpose of this study was to analyze the clinicopathologic significance of expression of EMT-related miRNAs, miR-9 and miR-155, in triple-negative breast cancers (TNBCs).
Then, based on the experimentally validated miRNA regulations to target genes, 4 candidate miRNAs (miR-24-3p, miR-192-5p, miR-139-5p and miR-155-5p) were identified to potentially contribute to ovarian cancer cell chemoresistance to CDDP through mediating OVCAR-8R cell CDDP resistance-related gene modules, which participated in functions that were closely related to "apoptosis", "cell cycle" and "adhesion".
The renal involvement may present with symptoms arising from interstitial nephritis, mainly distal renal tubular acidosis.
In a 29-year-old female patient, with bilateral nephrolithiasis, the diagnosis of primary Sjoegren's syndrome, tubulo-interstitial nephritis, distal renal tubular acidosis, and hypokalemia were established.
Tubulo-interstitial nephritis constitutes the most frequent renal lesion and distal tubular acidosis (Type 1) is the most important clinical manifestation of this tubular dysfunction, although the occurrence of chronic renal insufficiency is not an uncommon finding in the presence of distal renal tubular acidosis.
Right atrial thrombosis is classified as two type: A (mobile, thin) and B (non mobile and attached to atrial wall) that they are probably of cardiac origin due to local pathology, indwelling catheter, atrial fibrillation, stasis, rheumatological or hematological disease like protein C or S deficiency.
Venous stasis (e.g., immobilization, congestive heart failure, acute myocardial infarction, obesity), hypercoagulability (e.g., malignancy, inflammatory bowel disease, hyperhomocysteinemia, protein C resistance, antithrombin III, protein C or S deficiency) and endothelial trauma (e.g., surgical trauma, venous trauma, in-dwelling venous instrumentation) are risk factors.
To evaluate the use of selective vs. non-selective cyclo-oxygenase inhibitors (COXIs) for the treatment of chronic non-infectious, non-necrotizing scleritis and episcleritis.
Sixty-nine patients with scleritis and episcleritis treated for &gt;=2 months with COXIs were included.
Initial inflammation control was achieved in 78-81% of scleritis patients and 73-80% episcleritis patients on COXIs (p &gt; .05).
Selective vs. non-selective COXIs were equally efficacious for the treatment of chronic non-infectious, non-necrotizing scleritis and episcleritis.
Here we show that KIAA0793, containing substantial sequence homology with the catalytic Dbl homology domain of the faciogenital dysplasia gene product (FGD1), is a specific GEF for Cdc42.
The faciogenital dysplasia gene product, FGD1, is a Dbl family member that has recently been shown to function as a CDC42-specific GEF.
The majority of proteins that contain a DH (Dbl homology) domain were isolated as oncogenes in transfection assays, but two members of the DH family, FGD1 (the product of the faciogenital dysplasia or Aarskog-Scott syndrome locus) and Vav, have been shown to be essential for normal embryonic development.
Here we have examined the role of a Dbl-like molecule, the faciogenital dysplasia gene product (FGD1), which when mutated in its Dbl homology domain, cosegregates with the developmental disease Aarskog-Scott syndrome.
Non-survivors (n=29) versus survivors (n=46) were: older (77+/-9.8 vs 68+/-14, p=0.006), had higher New York Heart Association (NYHA) class (2.7+/-0.8 vs 2.3+/-0.8, p=0.037), higher brain natriuretic peptide (1157+/-717 vs 427+/-502 pg/mL, p=0.024, n=18), more coronary artery disease (61% vs 35%, p=0.031), more frequent left ventricular ejection fraction &lt;50% (20.7% vs 4.3%, p=0.026), more functional MR (41% vs 22%, p=0.069), higher mitral E/E(') (12.7+/-4.6 vs 9.8+/-4, p=0.008), higher pulmonary artery systolic pressure (PASP; 52.6+/-18.7 vs 36.7+/-14, p &lt;0.001), more &gt;=3+ tricuspid regurgitation (28% vs 4%, p=0.005) and more right ventricular dysfunction (26% vs 6%, p=0.035).
The presence of RBBB, IVCD, PASP &gt;= 40 mmHg, left atrium diameter and NYHA functional class were independent predictors of all-cause mortality in DCM patients.
The goals of therapy, which should be highlighted in follow-up imaging, include not only reduction of PASP, decrease in pulmonary vascular resistance, and improvements in right ventricular function, cardiac output, and tricuspid regurgitation.
The objective of this study was to determine the prognostic significance of CD163(+) cells, interleukin-10 (IL-10), and interferon-gamma (IFN-Gamma) in oral lesions associated with oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC).
beta-defensin expression was quantitatively assessed using real-time polymerase chain reactions in OSCC and control cell lines after exposure to interleukin-1beta, tumor necrosis factor-alpha, and interferon-gamma.
We investigated the utility of J chain and myocyte enhancer factor 2B (MEF2B) in the diagnosis of CHL; NLPHL; PMBL; T-cell/histiocyte-rich large B-cell lymphoma (TCRLBL); and B-cell lymphoma, unclassifiable, with features intermediate between diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and CHL, compared with OCT-2 and BOB.1.
Three of 3 B-cell lymphomas, unclassifiable, with features intermediate between diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and CHL, were negative for J chain and MEF2B.
J chain and MEF2B are highly sensitive and specific markers of NLPHL versus CHL; are particularly useful in highlighting LP cells; and, with rare exception, are of greater utility than OCT-2 and BOB.1 in differentiating CHL from NLPHL and other large B-cell lymphomas.
We identified several consensus differentially expressed genes and these genes were further confirmed with literature mining; at last, two genes, that is, immunoglobulin J chain and C-X-C motif chemokine ligand 17, were screened as novel gastric cancer associated genes.
A discovery/validation study on RR-MS responsive to glatiramer acetate identified 8 differentially expressed genes: ITGA2B, ITGB3, CD177, IGJ, IL5RA, MMP8, P2RY12, and S100Beta.
For the transcriptome analysis, we found some genes related to Alzheimer's disease (LRP1), an insulin-like growth factor receptor (IGF2R), immunity genes (IGL family and IGJ), two genes related to inflammatory reaction (CXCL5 and CCL3), one gene related to maintenance of cellular morphology (NHS), one gene considered to be a strong apoptosis inductor (LGALS14), and several transcripts of the neuroblastoma breakpoint family (NBPF).
Using principal components analysis, spots containing immunoglobulin J chain, apolipoprotein A-I, procollagen C-endopeptidase enhancer-1 and complement C4-A were associated with lymphoma development (P &lt; 0.0001).
The relationship between combined temperature factors showed a linear impact until reaching high temperatures limiting malaria incidence, with a lag 3.25 months.
Experimental models of malaria have shown that the regulatory molecules, cytotoxic T-lymphocyte attenuator-4 (CTLA-4), lymphocyte activation gene-3 (LAG-3), and programmed death-1 (PD-1) are involved in the functional impairment of T cells during infection.
We studied the arthritis association and the spliceo-transcriptome of four different Ltab-Ncr3 haplotypes and showed that higher Ltb and Ncr3 expression, lower Lst1 expression, and the expression of a shorter splice variant of Lst1 correlate with reduced arthritis severity in rats.
The C825T polymorphism (rs5443) of the Guanine Nucleotide-Binding protein subunit Beta3 (GNB3) gene has been associated with obesity, essential hypertension, atherosclerosis, coronary diseases, and cerebrovascular events, but with some sex-specific effects.
The guanine nucleotide-binding protein beta polypeptide 3 (GNB3) 825T allele encodes a product that enhances the activation of heterotrimeric G proteins, which is associated with the occurrence of the splice variant GBeta3 s that could play a role in vascular reactivity and hyperproliferation of smooth muscle cells, that makes such proteins attractive candidate gene products for susceptibility to essential hypertension (EH).
In our investigation of how Ang II signals are converted by the AT1R from physiological to pathological outputs, we found that the purinergic P2Y6 receptor (P2Y6R), an inflammation-inducible G protein (heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding protein)-coupled receptor (GPCR), promoted Ang II-induced hypertension in mice.
We identified the role of regulator of G protein (heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding protein) signaling 5 (RGS5) in blood pressure regulation during pregnancy and preeclampsia.
Here, we investigated the expression and function of NR6A1 and its underlying mechanisms in prostate cancer (PCa) patients who underwent radical prostatectomy.
A total of 303 cases of prostate cancer after radical prostatectomy were analysed in a tissue microarray (TMA) for NR6A1 immunohistochemistry-based protein expression.
Knockdown of NR6A1 by small interfering RNA mediated gene silencing and overexpression of NR6A1 through lentivirus were utilized to investigate its potential role in prostate cancer cells.
In addition, gene silencing of NR6A1 resulted in G0/G1 phase cell cycle arrest, and decreased metastatic and invasive potential of prostate cancer cells DU145 and PC3.
In contrast, overexpression of NR6A1 reduced G0/G1 phase cell cycle arrest, and promoted metastatic and invasive potential of prostate cancer cells 22RV1.
The aim of this review was to summarize the current evidence and to highlight the main issues future research needs to address regarding prostate cancer (PCa) treatment in renal transpant recipients (RTRs).
We conducted a multicenter retrospective study and reviewed the charts and records of 20 RTRs who had undergone RRP for localized prostate cancer at four French renal transplant centers belonging to the Renal Transplantation Committee of the French Urological Association from April 1996 to April 2007.
In our study, RRP was a safe procedure to treat localized prostate cancer in RTRs.
In this study, we examine the expression of RTR in murine placenta and several human placental choriocarcinoma cell lines.
RTR mRNA was also expressed in rat choriocarcinoma Rcho-1 cells and in the human placental choriocarcinoma cell lines BeWo, JAR, and JEG-3.
To evaluate the prognostic significance of PSA nadir (nPSA) and the time to nadir in disease free of recurrence (DFR) in localized carcinoma of prostate treated with radical radiotherapy (RTR).
The present study was aimed to determine the effect of steviol on PC1, CFTR, and Beta-catenin levels in renal epithelial cells with defective PC1 biogenesis and expression (Prkcsh-/- cell) and postnatal Pkd1 homozygous cell (Pkd1-/- cells).
Using western blot analysis, it was found that steviol treatment at 100myM for 24-48h substantially enhanced and stabilized PC1 C-terminal expression, while decreasing CFTR and Beta-catenin protein expression in both Prkcsh-/- and Pkd1-/- cells.
KPT-9274 can attenuate cellular proliferation and induce apoptosis associated with a decrease in active (phosphorylated) PAK4 and Beta-catenin in several Pkd1-null murine cell lines, with a less pronounced effect on the corresponding phenotypically normal cells.
Given the fundamental role of Beta-catenin signaling in intestinal epithelial cell proliferation and the growth-promoting function of protein kinase D1 (PKD1) in these cells, we hypothesized that PKDs mediate cross talk with Beta-catenin signaling.
GPCR stimulation also induced the formation of a complex between PKD1 and Beta-catenin, as shown by coimmunoprecipitation that depended on PKD1 catalytic activation, as it was abrogated by cell treatment with PKD family inhibitors.
Using transgenic mice that express elevated PKD1 protein in the intestinal epithelium, we detected a marked increase in the localization of Beta-catenin in the nucleus of crypt epithelial cells in the ileum of PKD1 transgenic mice, compared with nontransgenic littermates.
Pachyonychia congenita subjects were sampled who exhibited a mutation in KRT6A, KRT6B, KRT6C, KRT16 or KRT17, and the proteins were digested and analyzed by tandem mass spectrometry.
We thus performed extensive biomarker measures in these compartments using univariate and multivariate approaches to correlate disease biomarkers with SCORAD and with a combined hyperplasia score [thickness and keratin 16 (K16) mRNA] at baseline and after cyclosporine A treatment in 25 moderate to severe AD patients.
In addition to increased abundance, KRT16 demonstrated autoantigenicity, since sera from both fracture mice and CRPS patients showed increased autoantibody binding to recombinant kRT16 protein.
The identification of autoantibodies against KRT16 as a biomarker in mice and in humans is a critical step towards these goals, and towards redefining CRPS as having an autoimmune etiology.
These findings were associated with upregulation of mitochondrial Bak and Bcl-2/Bcl-xL, proapoptotic and prosurvival members in the Bcl-2 family, respectively, as well as increased mitochondrial cytochrome c release, caspase activation, and apoptosis in pancreatitis in PKCEpsilon knockout mice.
We then microinjected a GABAA receptor antagonist, an inhibitor of lactate transport (4CIN), or an inhibitor of lactate dehydrogenase, oxamate (OX), into the VMH prior to inducing hypoglycemia.
To assess whether lactate contributes to raising GABA in RH and diabetes, we injected 4CIN or OX into the VMH of RH and diabetic rats before inducing hypoglycemia.
Mechanistically, we show that the protective effect of IL-22 on pancreatitis was mediated via the induction of Bcl-2 and Bcl-X(L), which bind to Beclin-1 and subsequently inhibit autophagosome formation to ameliorate pancreatitis.
We used genetically modified rat models to investigate the role of MYL4 in atrial cardiomyopathy.
Exome sequencing and systematic bioinformatic analyses identified a rare missense variant of MYL4 (c.31G&gt;A [p.E11K]) in a large multiplex atrial cardiomyopathy family pedigree.
MYL4 knockout rats showed a similar atrial cardiomyopathy phenotype, whereas rats with an adjacent 4-amino-acid deletion showed no phenotype.
Loss-of-function MYL4 gene variants cause progressive atrial cardiomyopathy in humans and rats.
Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have yielded variants at &gt;30 loci that associate with atrial fibrillation (AF), including rare coding mutations in the sarcomere genes MYH6 and MYL4.
We imputed these variants into 104,220 individuals down to a minor allele frequency of 0.1% and found a recessive frameshift mutation in MYL4 that causes early-onset atrial fibrillation, several mutations in ABCB4 that increase risk of liver diseases and an intronic variant in GNAS associating with increased thyroid-stimulating hormone levels when maternally inherited.
The aim of this study is to examine the mitochondrial targeting of NDUFV2 and dissect the pathogenetic mechanism of one human deletion mutation present in patients with early-onset hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and encephalopathy.
The deletion mutant mimicking the human early-onset hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and encephalopathy lacked 19-40 residues in NDUFV2 and exhibited a significant reduction in its mitochondrial targeting ability.
The results of human disease cell model established that the impairment of mitochondrial localization of NDUFV2 as a mechanistic basis for early-onset hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and encephalopathy.
A small deletion in the second intron of human NDUFV2 (IVS2+5_+8delGTAA) has been shown to cause hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and encephalomyopathy [Benit, P., Beugnot, R., Chretien, D., Giurgea, I., de Lonlay-Debeney, P., Issartel, J.P., Kerscher, S., Rustin, P., Roetig, A.
While mutations in the NDUFS3 gene thus result in Leigh syndrome, a dissimilar clinical phenotype is observed in mutations in the NDUFV2 and NDUFS2 genes, resulting in encephalomyopathy and cardiomyopathy.
Combination of denaturing high performance liquid chromatography and sequence analysis allowed us to show that a 4-bp deletion in intron 2 (IVS2+5_+8delGTAA) of the NDUFV2 gene (encoding NADH dehydrogenase ubiquinone flavoprotein 2) causes complex I deficiency and early onset hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with trunk hypotonia in three affected sibs of a consanguineous family.
While mutation in a number of genes encoding complex I subunits essentially result in neurological symptoms, this first mutation in NDUFV2 is strikingly associated with cardiomyopathy, as previously observed in the unique case of NDFUS2 mutations.
Mice were fed a high fat diet to cause diet-induced obesity (DIO) and then administered GALP intranasally for 2 weeks (experimental), or vehicle (control).
GAL and GALP concentrations may be taken as potential biomarkers to predict development of obesity.
Galanin-like peptide (GALP) has an anti-obesity effect in rats and mice.
These results suggest that intranasal administration is an effective route whereby GALP can exert its effect as an anti-obesity drug.
These results show that GALP stimulates fatty acid Beta-oxidation in liver and lipolysis in adipose tissue, and suggest that the anti-obesity effect of GALP may be due to anorexigenic actions and improvement of lipid metabolism in peripheral tissues via the sympathetic nervous system.
We conclude that GALP may be of therapeutic value for obesity and life-style-related diseases in the near future.
Galanin-like peptide (GALP) shows potential as a therapeutic in the treatment of obesity and related conditions.
Variations within the gene locus encoding SHP-2 have been associated with increased susceptibility to develop ulcerative colitis and gastric atrophy.
When we considered the host genetic effects alone, gene-gene interactions consistently decreased the risks of gastric cancer and/or atrophic gastritis, including three two-way interactions: PGC rs6912200-PTPN11 rs12229892, PGC rs4711690-IL1B rs1143623 and PTPN11 rs12229892-IL1B rs1143623 and a three-way interaction: PGC rs4711690-PGC rs6912200-PTPN11 rs12229892.
Inconsistency of reported associations of the G/A polymorphism (rs2301756) in the PTPN11 gene and gastric atrophy prompted us to undertake a meta-analysis.
Associations of PTPN11 polymorphism with gastric atrophy in H. pylori (-) and (+) subjects are more readily interpreted in the homozygous and recessive models given that the dominant codominant effects skirted null associations.
Evidence of overall and subgroup decreased risks, strong in seropositive subjects, demonstrates protective effects of the PTPN11 G/A polymorphism from gastric atrophy.
The interaction between Src homology 2 domain-containing protein tyrosine phosphatase (SHP-2) of gastric epithelial cells and cagA from H. pylori plays a crucial role in developments of gastric atrophy and gastric cancer.
This study aimed to investigate the association of haplotype tagging SNPs (htSNPs) in the PTPN11 gene encoding SHP-2 with gastric atrophy and gastric cancer in Chinese population.
Our study provides the first evidence that rs12423190 polymorphism of the PTPN11 gene is significantly associated with an increased risk of gastric atrophy in H. pylori infected Chinese Han population, suggesting that rs12423190 polymorphism could be used as a useful marker of genetic susceptibility to gastric atrophy among H. pylori infected subjects.
The present study indicated that overexpression of GRP78 in colon cancer cells could promote cell-matrix adhesion through the upregulation of fibronectin, integrin-Beta1 and phosphorylated FAK.
Collectively, our results suggest that berberine-induced AMPK activation inhibits the metastatic potential of colon cancer cells by decreasing integrin Beta1 protein levels and downstream signaling.
On multivariate analysis, the independent predictors of gene expression were hepatitis C (Mx1, OAS2, PKR and IFI16), donor age (IFI16) and recipient gender (IRF7A) (P &lt; .05 for all).
No significant difference was observed in the expression of ERRbeta mRNA between endometrial carcinoma (23%, 0.21 +/- 0.16) and normal endometrium (22%, 0.27 +/- 0.15; P &gt; 0.05).
Patients undergoing major open vascular surgery (open abdominal aortic aneurysm [oAAA] repair, aortofemoral bypass, and lower extremity infrainguinal bypass [LEB]) were identified using the Michigan Surgical Quality Collaborative (MSQC) between July 2012 and June 2015.
Beta blocker utilization (&lt;1 month preoperative versus chronic) and POMI rates were prospectively collected for patients undergoing open abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) repair (n = 926) and lower extremity bypass (LEB; n = 2,123) from 2003 through 2008.
We studied 10,081 patients who underwent nonemergent carotid endarterectomy (CEA; n = 5293), lower extremity bypass (LEB; n = 2673), endovascular abdominal aortic aneurysm repair (EVAR; n = 1005), and open infrarenal abdominal aortic aneurysm repair (OAAA; n = 1,110) within the VSGNE from 2003 to 2008.
We mailed a survey to the directors of the 8 Canadian vascular surgery training programs, to ascertain the yearly operative volumes of their 3 most recent trainees with respect to 6 index operations: carotid endarterectomy (CEA), types I-IV thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm (TAA) repair, elective open infrarenal aortic aneurysm (eAAA) repair, ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm (rAAA) repair, endovascular abdominal aortic aneurysm repair (EVAR) and lower extremity arterial bypass (LEB).
Between 1999 and 2002, vascular surgery trainees in Canadian training programs were exposed to the following yearly clinical volumes (expressed as mean [and standard deviation]): CEA 55.4 (33.9), TAA 6.2 (3.8), eAAA 63.8 (30.0), rAAA 13.5 (9.4), EVAR 14.9 (9.6) and LEB 74.5 (34.5).
The range of yearly clinical volumes were: CEA 21-124, TAA 1-18, eAAA 30-133, rAAA 3-45, EVAR 0-34 and LEB 20-143.
Risk-adjustment models have not been developed for elective abdominal aortic aneurysm repair (AAA), lower extremity bypass revascularization (LEB), or lower extremity amputation (AMP).
Postoperative ileus is accompanied by activation of CGRP, NGF-TrkA, and PAR-2 in DRGs.
The present study by examining the mRNA and/or protein levels of TrkA and TrkB in the distal colon and in colonic primary afferent neurons in the dorsal root ganglia (DRG) during colitis demonstrated that colitis elicited location-specific changes in the mRNA and protein levels of TrkA and TrkB in colonic primary sensory pathways.
In colitis both the TrkA and TrkB protein levels were increased in the L1 and S1 DRGs in a time-dependent manner; however, the level of TrkB mRNA but not TrkA mRNA was increased in these DRGs.
Further experiments showed that colitis facilitated a retrograde transport of TrkA protein toward and an anterograde transport of TrkA mRNA away from the DRG, which may contribute to the increased TrkA mRNA level in the distal colon during colitis.
Double staining showed that the expression of TrkA but not TrkB was increased in the specifically labeled colonic afferent neurons in the L1 and S1 DRGs during colitis; this increase in TrkA level was attenuated by pretreatment with resiniferatoxin.
These results suggested that colitis-induced primary afferent activation involved retrograde transport of TrkA but not TrkB from the distal colon to primary afferent neurons in DRG.
In fact, receptor rearrangements or point mutations convert RET and NTRK1 in dominantly acting transforming genes leading to thyroid tumors, whereas inactivating mutations, associated with Hirschsprung's disease (HSCR) and congenital insensitivity to pain with anhidrosis (CIPA), impair RET and NTRK1 functions, respectively.
Thus, our results corroborate that therapeutic strategies based on the modulation of CCR1/CCR5-mediated cell migration and/or effector function may contribute to cardiac tissue damage limitation during chronic Chagas disease.
The results of integrated analysis explored 3 OA-related pathways (rheumatoid arthritis, osteoclast differentiation and ECM-receptor interaction) and 4 candidate genes of OA (BST2, HDAC4, ITGB2 and VCAM1) that may be therapeutic targets.
The patient showed moderate expression of CD18 in neutrophils with a homozygous splice mutation with c.41_c.58+2dup20 of ITGB2 and experienced recurrent severe infections complicated with systemic lupus erythematosus.
She received hematopoietic stem cell transplantation from a matched elder brother with heterozygous mutation of ITGB2, and has since remained free of infection and systemic lupus erythematosus symptoms without immunosuppression therapy.
Using mice deficient in all beta2 integrins (CD18 null mice), we demonstrate that expression of these heterodimeric adhesion molecules is critical for arthritis induction in the K/B x N serum transfer model.
Using null-allele mice and blocking mAbs, we demonstrate specifically that CD11a/CD18 (LFA-1) is absolutely required for the development of arthritis in this model.
Thus, key proteins in Alzheimer Disease and Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), including amyloid-Beta precursor protein, Tau and superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1), spread to adjacent cells in their misfolded aggregated forms and exhibit template-directed misfolding to induce further misfolding, disruptions to proteostasis and toxicity.
The method is useful for identifying the defective APP-mRNA isoform in LND patients, and in neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative disorders in which the APP gene is involved in the pathogenesis of diseases such as autism, fragile X syndrome, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and Alzheimer's disease, and may pave the way for new strategies applicable to rational antisense drugs design.
Several findings suggest that the amyloid precursor protein (APP) and the amyloid cascade may play a role in motor neuron disease (MND).
Considering that dementia is one of the most frequent non-motor symptoms in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and that hippocampus is one of the brain areas with greater presence of amyloid-related changes in neurodegenerative diseases, our aim was to analyze the molecular markers of the amyloid cascade of APP in pathology studies of the hippocampus of autopsied patients with ALS and ALS-frontotemporal dementia (FTD).
Immunohistochemical studies and confocal microscopy were used to analyze the expression of APP, TDP-43, pho-TDP-43, ABeta, APP intracellular cytoplasmatic domain (AICD) peptide, Fe65 protein, and pho-TAU in the hippocampus of seven patients with ALS, two patients with ALS-FTD, and four controls.
These results suggest that Sidt2(-/-) mice had spontaneous nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) accompanied by ERS.
Intraperitoneal and oral glucose tolerance tests in Sidt2 knockout mice indicated glucose intolerance and decreased serum insulin level.
For example, CDH15 and PCDH19 are associated with cognitive impairment; CDH5, CDH8, CDH9, CDH10, CDH13, CDH15, PCDH10, PCDH19 and PCDHb4 with autism; CDH7, CDH12, CDH18, PCDH12 and FAT with bipolar disease and schizophrenia; and CDH11, CDH12 and CDH13 with methamphetamine and alcohol dependency.
The UCNs emitting UV/blue and green/red multiband light were used to activate the photoresponsive Azo and photosensitizer RB molecules; The mesoporous silica shell offered the possibilities to load anticancer drug and conjugate the light triggers; As there are strong charge interaction and hydrogen bonds between Dox and surface silanols of mesoporous silica, the azobenzene molecules worked as "gatekeeper" and "molecular stirrer" to precisely trap and propel the release of Dox under the external stimuli.
UCN1 is significantly reduced in endometrial adenocarcinoma compared to healthy controls.
UCN1 suppressed migration of endometrial cancer cells in vitro.
We demonstrate that UCN1 significantly suppresses the migration of endometrial cancer cells but has no effect on their proliferation.
Thus, loss of UCN1 in endometrial cancer may promote invasion and metastatic spread.
Seven pathogenic variants leading to NSHL have so far been reported on two mitochondrial genes: MT-RNR1 encoding 12SrRNA and MT-TS1 encoding tRNA for Ser((UCN)) .
This study examines the role of FcgammaRIIB in the initiation of allergic rhinitis in mice.
These results suggest that FcgammaRIIB plays a regulatory role in the initiation of allergic rhinitis that is independent of either mouse strain or type of sensitization.
This study evaluated the interaction of radiation therapy (RT) and radiofrequency kyphoplasty (RFK) in the treatment of myeloma associated VCF.
Eighty-six myeloma patients with VCF were treated with RFK followed by radiation therapy (RFK group) or vice versa (RT group).
RFK is an effective method for treating VCF in myeloma patients independent of treatment order with regard to radiation therapy.
We investigated the involvement of RFK in cisplatin resistance using human prostate cancer PC3 cells.
The present study suggests that RFK expression is involved not only in cellular protection from oxidative stress but also in malignant progression of prostate cancer.
The anti-cancer effect of ATF-Fc (alone and in combination with trastuzumab) on tumor cells and in a nude mouse tumor model was evaluated by detecting the expression of uPA, urokinase plasminogen activator receptor (uPAR) and HER-2.
To analyze the association of genotype combinations of the polymorphic markers G276T in the ADIPOQ gene, Glu23Lys in the KCNJ11 gene, and IVS3C&gt;T in the TCF7L2 gene with the development of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) in the Kyrgyz population.
KCNJ1 variation is associated with multiple diseases, such as antenatal Bartter syndrome and diabetes.
Neither diabetes mellitus nor Tempol altered Kir1.1, Kir2.1, Kir6.1, or SUR2B protein levels in renal cortical microvessels.
To the extent that the effects of Tempol reflect its antioxidant actions, our observations indicate that oxidative stress contributes to the exaggerated impact of Kir1.1, Kir2.1, and K(ATP) channels on afferent arteriolar tone during diabetes mellitus and that this phenomenon involves posttranslational modulation of channel function.
Furthermore, results suggested that co-exposure exacerbated the activation of TRPV1 signal pathways, with an enhancement in substance P and calcitonin gene-related peptide production, which contributed to inflammation in asthma by neurogenic inflammation.
It is concluded that co-exposure to PM2.5 and FA exacerbated allergic asthma through oxidative stress and enhanced TRPV1 activation.
In this review we will summarize recent evidence for an involvement of TRP channels (TRPA1, TRPC4, TRPC6, TRPV1, TRPV4, TRPM2 and TRPM8) expressed in the lung in pathways of toxin sensing and as mediators of lung inflammation and associated diseases like asthma, COPD, lung fibrosis and edema formation.
Our purpose was to investigate the regulatory mechanism of TRPV1 and related cytokines on children bronchial asthma.
Logistic regression analysis further demonstrated that TRPV1 mRNA level, EOS, IL-4 and IL-5 may be risk factors for children bronchial asthma.
The preliminary regulatory network of TRPV1 and related cytokines on children bronchial asthma established in this study provides certain theoretical basis for pathogenesis and treatment of children bronchial asthma.
oleoylethanolamide, sphingosine-1-phosphate, N-palmitoyltaurine) were postulated to be involved in activating the transient receptor potential vanilloid type 1 (TRPV1) receptor, driving TRPV1-dependent pathogenesis in asthma.Our findings suggest that asthma is characterised by a modest systemic metabolic shift in a disease severity-dependent manner, and that steroid treatment significantly affects metabolism.
To investigate the effects of particulate matter &lt;= 2.5 microns (PM2.5) on asthma-related phenotypes and on lung expression of TRPA1 and TRPV1 proteins in a mouse model of asthma.
PM2.5 exacerbates effects of asthma in this model, possibly by regulating TRPA1 and TRPV1 and the relevant neurokines.
Our results show that CM Tln2 is essential for proper Beta1D-integrin expression and that Tln1 can substitute for Tln2 in preserving heart function, but that loss of all Tln forms from the heart-muscle cell leads to myocyte instability and a dilated cardiomyopathy.
The levels of two miRNAs, hsa-miR-132-5p and hsa-miR-221-5p, were inversely correlated with the expression of CYP1A2 mRNA transcripts in normal human liver tissue samples represented in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) dataset.
In situ hybridization and functional experiments in a panel of colorectal cancer cell lines and xenografts further clarified the role of clinical relevant miRNAs.Results: Six miRNAs (miR-92b-3p, miR-188-3p, miR-221-5p, miR-331-3p, miR-425-3p, and miR-497-5p) were identified as strong predictors of survival in the screening cohort.
Particularly, CLN1, CLN2 and CLN3 were obtained by adding derivatives C1, C2 or C3 during nanoparticles preparation, while CLN2-Pt were obtained by treating preformed CLN2 with Pt(II).
As determined by ICP-OES, a content of P and Pt 2.2-fold and 2.5-fold higher in CLN2-Pt than in CLN3 was evidenced.
In fact, the antiproliferative activity shown by CLN3, CLN2-Pt on the three model cancer cell lines was substantially similar and comparable to that of complex C3 in dmso solution.
Separate prediction models which could predict consumption of each blood component in intra and postoperative phase of LDLT were derived from among the preoperative Hb, Hct, model for end-stage liver disease (MELD) score, body surface area (BSA), Plt, T. proteins, S. creatinine, B. urea, INR, and serum sodium and chloride.
No association with vitiligo was found for the MECL1 gene, which encodes a third immunoproteasome subunit and is unlinked to the MHC class II region.
We report a novel LHX3 mutation, which is associated with combined pituitary hormone deficiency including ACTH deficiency, short neck, and sensorineural hearing loss.
So-called stress hormones, like adrenocorticotropic hormone, cortisol, and antidiuretic hormone, are released concomitant with nausea and vomiting in motion sickness, but do not seem to be involved in the aetiology of motion sickness.
MMP-1/7 serum levels were measured using Luminex xMAP technology in 139 patients- 47 IPF, 36 non-IPF Usual Interstitial Pneumonia (UIP), 14 idiopathic Nonspecific Interstitial Pneumonia (iNSIP), 29 secondary NSIP (secNSIP), 13 stage IV sarcoidosis- and 20 healthy controls, and compared using the Mann-Whitney U test.
This activity is regulated by such inhibitors as metalloprvteinase 1 tissue inhibitor and cystatin C. The comparative analysis was applied concerning matrix metalloproteinase 1 precursor; metalloproteinase I tissue inhibitor and cystatin C--indicators of conditions of the "proteolysis-antiproteolysis" system in the bronchoalveolar secretion of patients with chronic obstructive lung disease, bronchial asthma and pneumonia.
To observe the effects of Dureping Injection on the contents of matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) and tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinase-1 (TIMP-1) in the lung tissue of mice with pneumonia of influenza virus infection.
We developed a Korean version of the NPI-Q (KNPI-Q) and compared subitems with those of the Korean version of the NPI (KNPI) in 63 dementia patients; 47 patients had been diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease with dementia, 8 with vascular dementia, and 8 with dementia with Lewy body disease.
All patients received the Korean version of the Mini-Mental State Examination and the Clinical Dementia Rating within 1 month of the KNPI-Q.
The KNPI-Q is a reliable and brief instrument that can be employed for screening in the evaluation of neuropsychiatric symptoms of dementia and associated caregiver distress.
The cognitive function of each sub-domain, functional impairments, depressive symptoms, and caregiver burden were assessed using the dementia version of Seoul Neuropsychological Screening Battery (SNSB-D), Barthel Index for Daily Living Activities (ADL), Seoul-Instrumental Activities of Daily Living (S-IADL), the Clinical Dementia Rating Sum of Box (CDR-SB), the Global Deterioration Scale (GDS), the Korean version of the Neuropsychiatric Inventory (K-NPI), and the 15-item Geriatric Depression Scale.
Our primary endpoints were change from baseline to weeks 12 and 24 in the Seoul Neuropsychological Screening Battery-Dementia version (SNSB-D) and the Korean version of neuropsychiatric inventory (K-NPI).
The patients were also evaluated using the Korean version of the Severe Impairment Battery (SIB-Ko), Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR), Global Deterioration Scale (GDS), Barthel Activities of Daily Living (B-ADL), the Korean version of the Instrumental Activities of Daily Living (K-IADL), the Korean version of the Neuropsychiatric Inventory (K-NPI) and the Functional Assessment Staging (FAST).
The aim of this study is to develop the Korean version of the NPI (K-NPI) and to test its reliability and usefulness in dementia patients.
Total K-NPI scores correlated positively with dementia severity assessed with the Korean Mini-Mental State Examination.
The K-NPI, whose reliability and competency are comparable to those of the original version, may be a reliable and useful tool for measuring neuropsychiatric disturbances in Korean dementia patients.
Bone and cartilage and their disorders are addressed under the following headings: functions of bone; normal and abnormal bone remodeling; osteopetrosis and osteoporosis; epithelial-mesenchymal interaction, condensation and differentiation; osteoblasts, markers of bone formation, osteoclasts, components of bone, and pathology of bone; chondroblasts, markers of cartilage formation, secondary cartilage, components of cartilage, and pathology of cartilage; intramembranous and endochondral bone formation; RUNX genes and cleidocranial dysplasia (CCD); osterix; histone deacetylase 4 and Runx2; Ligand to receptor activator of NFkappaB (RANKL), RANK, osteoprotegerin, and osteoimmunology; WNT signaling, LRP5 mutations, and beta-catenin; the role of leptin in bone remodeling; collagens, collagenopathies, and osteogenesis imperfecta; FGFs/FGFRs, FGFR3 skeletal dysplasias, craniosynostosis, and other disorders; short limb chondrodysplasias; molecular control of the growth plate in endochondral bone formation and genetic disorders of IHH and PTHR1; ANKH, craniometaphyseal dysplasia, and chondrocalcinosis; transforming growth factor beta, Camurati-Engelmann disease (CED), and Marfan syndrome, types I and II; an ACVR1 mutation and fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva; MSX1 and MSX2: biology, mutations, and associated disorders; G protein, activation of adenylyl cyclase, GNAS1 mutations, McCune-Albright syndrome, fibrous dysplasia, and Albright hereditary osteodystrophy; FLNA and associated disorders; and morphological development of teeth and their genetic mutations.
Genome-wide analysis showed an association of asthma in Russians with the polymorphic loci of gene MUC19 (12q12) encoding gel-forming mucin 19.
Seven polymorphic loci of gene MUC19 (rs1492313, rs2588401, rs2588402, rs2638863, rs2638864, rs1352940, and rs2933373), which are in close linkage disequilibrium among themselves and rs2933346, are associated with asthma with the same p-value (p = 4.96 x 10(-6)).
According to our data, the association of polymorphic variants of gene MUC19 with asthma has not been previously identified in any study.
Our results indicate the important role of polymorphic variants of gene MUC19 in the formation of a predisposition to the development of asthma in individuals of Russian ethnicity.
To detect the mucin gene (MUC2, MUC5AC, MUC5B, MUC18 and MUC19) expression in the nasal polyps, allergic rhinitis (AR) and the normal nasal mucosa in human.
It indicates that the secretion of MUC19 in allergic rhinitis was on high level.
We aimed to assess the impact of hypocretin deficiency on attentional functioning by comparing performances on the attention network test (ANT) of narcoleptic patients with hypocretin deficiency (narcolepsy type 1-NT1) versus patients without hypocretin deficiency (narcolepsy type 2-NT2) and healthy controls.
A randomized, double-blind prospective trial among recent onset type 1 diabetes patients has been designed using Cyclosporine A and a proton-pump inhibitor, which increases gastrin levels and has been shown to work through the Reg receptor to transform pancreatic duct cells into islets.
In the A(1)AR agonist area, clinical candidates have been discovered for the following conditions: atrial arrhythmias (tecadenoson, selodenoson and PJ-875); Type II diabetes and insulin sensitizing agents (GR79236, ARA, RPR-749, and CVT-3619); and angina (BAY 68-4986).
The treatment of type II diabetes using A(1)AR agonists in the clinic has met with limited success due to cardiovascular side effects and a well-defined desensitization of full agonists in human trials (GR79236, ARA, and RPR 749).
Reg protein acts as an autocrine/paracrine growth factor to induce beta-cell replication via the Reg receptor and ameliorates experimental diabetes.
We have demonstrated in vitro and in vivo that the exogenous addition of rat and human Reg gene products, Reg/REG proteins, induced beta-cell replication via the Reg receptor and thereby ameliorated experimental diabetes.
From the regenerating islet-derived cDNA library we isolated Reg (Regenerating Gene) and demonstrated that Reg protein induces beta-cell replication via the Reg receptor and ameliorates experimental diabetes.
Genomic DNA was isolated from patients with hypopituitarism to amplify and sequence eight pituitary specific transcription factors (HESX1, LHX3, LHX4, OTX2, PITX2, POU1F1, PROP1, and SIX6).
Rat insulinoma INS-1E cells and mouse beta-TC3 cells stably expressing Gadd45b were generated.
To define the genetic landscape of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and assess the contribution of possible oligogenic inheritance, we aimed to comprehensively sequence 17 known ALS genes in 391 ALS patients from the United States.
High nuclear ATF2 expression was mainly observed in translocation-associated and/or spindle cell sarcomas including synovial sarcoma, desmoplastic small round cell tumor, endometrial stromal sarcoma, gastrointestinal stromal tumor, malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor, and solitary fibrous tumor.
SIRT1 immunoreactivity was reviewed in a series of 164 soft tissue tumors including alveolar soft part sarcoma, angiomyolipoma, clear cell sarcoma, desmoid/fibromatosis, desmoplastic small round cell tumor, Ewing sarcoma, gastrointestinal stromal tumor, glomus tumor, leiomyoma, leiomyosarcoma, lipoma, liposarcoma, malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor, nodular fasciitis, osteosarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, schwannoma, solitary fibrous tumor, synovial sarcoma, undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma, and Wilms tumor.
Pathologic diagnosis of CD117-negative GISTs can be facilitated with the application of a panel of immunohistochemical markers, including DOG-1 and WT-1.
In this study, WT-1 immunoreactivity was explored in 97 gastrointestinal stromal tumours (GISTs).
The expression of WT-1 was compared with other immunohistochemical markers of GIST and the association with clinicopathological features was also evaluated.
All 97 GISTs were positive for WT-1 and the staining intensity was strong in 59 (60.8%), moderate in 28 (28.9%) and weak in 10 cases (10.3%).
Although the biological roles of WT-1 in GIST are still unknown, our findings might provide a rationale for immunotherapy targeting WT-1 and a therapeutic solution to the challenge of imatinib-resistant GISTs.
WT-1 immunoreactivity in gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST) was currently not known.
We, therefore, investigated the expression of WT-1 in GIST in comparison to other soft tissue tumors by immunohistochemistry and Western blot analysis.
We found that all 28 cases (100%) of GIST are positive for WT-1, diffusely (&gt;75%, 3+) in 13 (46.4%) cases, moderately (26% to 75%, 2+) in 13 (46.4%) cases, and focally (5% to 25%, 1+) in 2 (7.2%) cases.
The significance of cytoplasmic expression of WT-1 in GIST and some smooth muscle tumors is unclear and warrant further investigation.
The potential roles of WT-1 in the diagnosis and treatment of GIST were discussed.
This review will discuss five types of sarcoma that display aberrant tyrosine kinase pathway signaling: gastrointestinal stromal tumor, inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor, congenital fibrosarcoma and mesoblastic nephroma, dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans, and desmoplastic small round cell tumor; one sarcoma predisposition syndrome with specific dysregulation of the ras pathway--neurofibromatosis--will also be discussed.
An additional 80 endometrial cancer patients were studied for RAB32 methylation and MSI status.
In contrast, RAB32 methylation occurred in only 1 of 80 endometrial cancers, including 20 MSI-H, 8 MSI-L and 52 MSS tumors.
We conclude that although RAB32 methylation is rare in endometrial cancers, it is strongly associated with hMLH1 hypermethylation and MSI in gastric adenocarcinomas.
Panel, consisting of 16 new potential markers for early and differentiated diagnosis of prostatic gland cancer, was identified: BHLHE40, FOXP1, LOC285205, ITGA9, CTDSPL, FGF12, LOC440944/SETD5, VHL, CLCN2, OSBPL10/ZNF860, LMCD1, FAM19A4, CAND2, MAP4, KY and LRRC58.
However, there is little information about the involvement of MAP4 in human cancer.
Here we show that MAP4 serves as a regulator of invasion and migration in esophageal squamous cancer cells.
The fusion between echinoderm microtubule-associated protein 4 (EML4) and anaplastic lymphatic tumor kinase (ALK) rearrangement is present in approximately 5% of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients.
#背#景#与#目#的 #棘#皮#动#物#微#管#相#关#蛋#白4 (echinoderm microtubule-associated protein 4, EML4) #与#间#变#性#淋#巴#瘤#激#酶 (anaplastic lymphatic tumor kinase, ALK) #重#排#形#成#的#融#合#基#因#存#在#于#大#约5%#的#非#小#细#胞#肺#癌 (non-small cell lung cancer, NSCLC) #患#者#中, #是#继#表#皮#生#长#因#子#受#体 (epidermal growth factor receptor, EGFR) #、K-ras#之#后#又#一#新#型#靶#点#基#因#。#有#数#据#显#示#携#带EML4-ALK#融#合#基#因#的NSCLC#患#者#接#受ALK#抑#制#剂#治#疗#后, #其#疾#病#控#制#的#有#效#率#可#达80%, #探#索#和#建#立#能#够#准#确#快#速#检#测#出NSCLC#患#者EML4-ALK#融#合#突#变#的#方#法, #是#筛#选#出#适#合#治#疗#的#优#势#人#群#的#关#键#。#本#研#究#分#析#免#疫#组#化#法 (immunohistochemistry, IHC) #检#测EML4-ALK#融#合#基#因#突#变#的#敏#感#度#与#特#异#度, #评#价#该#方#法#准#确#性#及#临#床#应#用#价#值, #从#而#为#肺#癌#患#者"#个#体#化#分#子#治#疗"#提#供#依#据#。#方#法 #通#过Pubmed#数#据#库#检#索#所#有#符#合#检#索#条#件#的#文#献, #末#次#检#索#日#期#为2015#年2#月25#日, #根#据#纳#入#和#排#除#标#准#进#行#进#一#步#筛#选, #采#用#诊#断#试#验meta#分#析#方#法, #比#较#特#异#性#抗#体#免#疫#组#化#法#与"#金#标#准"#荧#光#原#位#杂#交 (fluorescence in situ hybridization, FISH) #法#的#敏#感#度#、#特#异#度, #以#明#确#特#异#性#抗#体IHC#作#为#筛#查#方#法#的#可#行#性#。#结#果 #本#文11#篇#文#献#纳#入meta#分#析, EML4-ALK#融#合#基#因#免#疫#组#化#累#计#病#例3,234#例, #诊#断#比#值#比 (diagnositic odds ratio, DOR) #为1,135.00 (95%CI: 337.10-3,821.46) #；#综#合#受#试#者#工#作#特#征#曲#线  (summary receiver operating characteristic curve, SROC) #下#面#积#为0.992,3 (SEAUC=0.003,2) , Q*#统#计#量#为0.964,4 (SEQ*=0.008,7) #。#结#论 #特#异#性#抗#体IHC#法#检#测EML4-ALK#融#合#基#因#的#方#法#可#行, #具#有#高#特#异#度#和#敏#感#度, #可#作#为#一#种#简#单#快#速#的#筛#查#方#法, #具#有#临#床#应#用#价#值#。.
Based on these data, we proposed the set of potential biomarkers for detection of prostate cancer and discrimination between prostate tumors with different malignancy and aggressiveness: BHLHE40, FOXP1, LOC285205, ITGA9, CTDSPL, FGF12, LOC440944/SETD5, VHL, CLCN2, OSBPL10/ZNF860, LMCD1, FAM19A4, CAND2, MAP4, KY, and LRRC58.
We also analyzed gene expression of MAP4 in 34 patients with bladder cancer using immunohistochemical staining assay.
We used cAMP elevators and small interfering RNA of MAP4 here, found that both of them can potently inhibit the invasion and the migration of bladder cancer cells by disrupting microtubule (MT) cytoskeleton.
Consistently, the bladder cancer grade is positively correlated with the protein level of MAP4.
Our results indicated that the cAMP/PKA signaling pathway might inhibit bladder cancer cell invasion by targeting MAP4-dependent microtubule dynamics, which could be exploited for the therapy of invasive bladder cancer.
Irritable bowel syndrome symptoms consistently improved after 3 weeks of LFD, and significantly more participants reported symptom relief in response to placebo (80%) than FOS (30%).
Children with congenital esophageal atresia (EA) and tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) have chronic respiratory symptoms including recurrent pneumonia, wheezing and persistent cough.
Adult patients experiencing symptoms of cough and recurrent aspiration pneumonia should be evaluated for congenital TEF.
Our patient underwent primary repair of OA/TEF malformations, which was later complicated by pneumonia and a recurrent TEF.
These findings suggest that a relatively small increase in plasma TNF-Alfa, and decreases in urine TNF-Alfa, GM-CSF, and IL-15 from just before to just after the diagnosis of pneumonia could be markers for an increased risk of PUs in individuals with pneumonia after traumatic SCI.
The study aimed to investigate the innate cytokine interleukin-15 (IL-15) as a marker of disease severity.A prospective single-centre observational study was conducted in a university-affiliated paediatric teaching hospital, comparing children (0-18 months) hospitalised for viral bronchiolitis, those admitted to the paediatric intensive care unit with severe disease and healthy age-matched controls.
Peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMC) IL-15 mRNA expression was significantly higher in those with moderate severity bronchiolitis compared with controls and those with severe disease.
Targets of de-regulated miRNA were differentially expressed in bronchiolitis, including JAK3, STAT5A and NFKB1 on the IL-15 signalling pathway.IL-15 is associated with disease severity in children hospitalised with viral bronchiolitis.
The present study aimed to investigate the role of Interleukin 15 (IL-15) in protein degradation in skeletal muscle mediated by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway (UPP) in a rat model of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
Patients with SWA were older at seizure diagnosis than those with SA (p=0.04), were less often referred for evaluation of seizures or epilepsy (p=0.04), and were referred faster for VEM, despite SWA were significantly less likely to include motor manifestations (p=0.0004).
We suggest that patients with SWA have a unique epilepsy syndrome.
Achilles tendon (T) and Hoffmann (H) reflexes were evoked during spike and wave activity (SWA) in 6 patients with generalized epilepsy, selected on the basis of their photosensitivity.
Partial epilepsy after shunting manifested itself in 15 patients, but this did not correlate with the side of the shunt or with the side of the SWA in the EEG.
We hypothesized that the NDI may be due to of severe hypokalemia induced tubular dysfunction.
Previously, we reported an increase of V1aR mRNA and a decrease of V2R mRNA in the collecting ducts under chronic metabolic acidosis.
Patients with moderate to severe nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy (NPDR) had POBF 18% higher than the control (mean OBF, 943 microL/min).
Among PRP-treated subjects with PDR, ocular blood flow was 22% below the control (mean OBF, 619 microL/min), and 34% less than moderate to severe nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy.
Diabetic patients with no retinopathy or mild NPDR had OBF indistinguishable from the control (785 vs. 797 microL/min).
POBF is unaffected early in diabetic retinopathy, but increases significantly in eyes with moderate to severe NPDR.
These experimental data represent the largest published assessment of POBF in NPDR.
POBF in the patients with non-exudative and exudative age related macular degeneration (AMD) was investigated.
The POBF increased but was still below normal levels at the NPDR stage, and then increased to an above normal level in the PPDR/PDR stage of diabetic retinopathy.
Right before and one month after this fourth vaccine dose, the avidity of IgG antibodies against diphtheria toxin (DT), tetanus toxin (TT), pertussis toxin (PT), filamentous hemagglutinin (FHA) and pertactin (Prn) was determined using 1.5 M ammonium thiocyanate as dissociating agent.
Immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibodies against pertussis toxin (PT), filamentous hemagglutinin (FHA), pertactin (Prn), tetanus toxoid (TT), and diphtheria toxoid (DT) were measured using commercially available enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA).
We have developed a magnetic bead-based pentaplex immunoassay (MIA) for the simultaneous detection of IgG antibodies against diphtheria toxin (DT), tetanus toxin (TT), pertussis toxin (PT), filamentous hemagglutinin (FHA) and pertactin (Prn).
Immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibodies against pertussis toxin (PT), filamentous hemagglutinin (FHA), pertactin (Prn), tetanus toxoid (TT) and diphtheria toxoid (DT) were measured using commercially available ELISA tests.
Antibody geometric mean concentrations (GMCs) against tetanus (TT), diphtheria (DT), pertussis toxin (PT), filamentous haemagglutinin (FHA) and pertactin (Prn) were measured with commercial ELISA tests in samples taken preceding maternal vaccination and one month afterwards, at delivery and from the cord blood, and in infants before and 1 month after the primary series of 3 pertussis containing hexavalent vaccines.
Immunoglobulin G (IgG) against tetanus (TT), diphtheria (DT), pertussis toxin (PT), filamentous hemaglutinin (FHA) and pertactin (Prn) were measured using commercial ELISA tests, at baseline, 1 month after maternal vaccination, at delivery, and in infants from cord blood and before and after the primary series (EPI: month 2-3-4) of a pertussis containing vaccine.
Anti-Pertussis Toxin (PT), filamentous hemagglutinin (FHA), pertactin (Prn), tetanus toxin (TT) and diphtheria toxin (DT) antibodies were measured by ELISA.
Geometric mean titers were not different after prebiotic supplementation at 5 months, Ptx (37/44 EU/ml), FHA (78/96 EU/ml), Prn (78/80 EU/ml), Diphtheria (0.40/0.57 IU/ml), Tetanus (0.74/0.99 IU/ml) and Hib (0.35/0.63 myg/ml), and at 12 months Ptx (55/66 EU/ml), FHA (122/119 EU/ml), Prn (116/106 Eu/ml), Diphtheria (0.88/1.11 IU/ml), Tetanus (1.64/1.79 IU/ml) and Hib (2.91/2.55 myg/ml).
This multiplex immunoassay (MIA) can simultaneously determine levels of specific mouse serum IgG antibodies to P antigens P.69 pertactin (P.69 Prn), filamentous hemagglutinin (FHA), pertussis toxin (Ptx), and combined fimbria type 2 and 3 antigens (Fim2/3) and to diphtheria toxin (Dtx) and tetanus toxin (TT) in a single well.
Our recent study showed reduced G protein Gamma2 subunit (Gng2/GNG2) expression levels in malignant melanoma cells compared with those in benign melanocytic cells in both mice and humans.
Our recent study also showed that reduced GNG2 alone augmented proliferation of malignant melanoma cells.
To our knowledge, however, there is no evidence showing an effect of Gng2/GNG2 alone on metastasis of any cancers including malignant melanoma.
In his study, we first prepared GNG2-overexpressed SK-Mel28 human malignant melanoma cells, in which GNG2 protein expression level was undetectably low.
Migration and invasion activities of the GNG2-overexpressed malignant melanoma cells were suppressed up to 1/10th, with decreased activity of focal adhesion kinase (FAK).
Taken together, our results suggest that overexpression of GNG2 alone inhibits metastasis in human malignant melanoma cells with decreased FAK activity.
Thus, GNG2 might be a candidate of molecular targets of prevention and therapy for metastasis of malignant melanoma.
Our recent study showed reduced G protein Gamma2 subunit (Gng2/GNG2) expression levels in malignant melanoma cells compared with those in benign melanocytic cells in both mice and humans.
At present, however, there is no evidence showing an effect of Gng2/GNG2 alone on cancer biology.
The purpose of this study was to examine the biological significance of GNG2 in human malignant melanoma cells.
Levels of proliferation and activities of signal transduction molecules were examined in both GNG2-overexpressed and -depleted human malignant melanoma cells.
Proliferation of GNG2-overexpressed SK-Mel28 human malignant melanoma cells was suppressed with decreased c-SRC and AKT activities and increased p21(Cip/WAF1) expression level in vitro.
In contrast, proliferation of GNG2-depleted A375P human malignant melanoma cells was enhanced with increased c-SRC and AKT activities and decreased p21(Cip/WAF1) expression level in vitro.
We demonstrated for the first time that increased protein expression level of GNG2 alone inhibits proliferation of malignant melanoma cells in vitro and in vivo, suggesting that GNG2 could be a novel molecular target for malignant melanoma therapy.
Gng2 transcript expression levels in a malignant melanoma were less than 1/10 of the level in a benign tumor.
The difference in Gng2 transcript expression levels between benign tumors and malignant melanomas was greatest among all of the G protein Gamma subunits examined in this study.
Moreover, protein expression levels of Gng2 were decreased in malignant melanomas compared with those in benign melanocytic tumors in RET-mice.
Analysis of human malignant melanomas also showed reduced GNG2 protein expression levels in five human malignant melanoma cell lines compared with the expression levels in normal human epithelial melanocytes (NHEM).
Thus, we demonstrated for the first time that Gng2/GNG2 expression levels are reduced in malignant melanoma, suggesting that GNG2 could be a novel biomarker for malignant melanoma.
Several DNA repair enzymes are essential for comprehensive neural repair mechanisms after stroke, including PolBeta and NEIL3 for neurogenesis, APE1 for white matter repair, Gadd45b for axonal regeneration, and DNA-PKs for neurovascular remodeling.
The aims of this study are to determine the expression and the prognostic value of TFF3 in a large series of human endometrial cancer and its relation with ER.
We evaluated 328 endometrial carcinomas using TFF3 and ER antibody on paraffin-embedded tissue.
1-TFF3 seems to be a novel pathway in the pathogenesis of type I endometrial carcinomas.
2-The strong association of TFF3 and ER in the estrogen-dependent endometrioid carcinoma could explain the reason for its frequent expression by this tumor type.
3-TFF3(+) seems to forecast a good prognosis in type I endometrial carcinomas.
Based on our data, TFF3 expression in endometrial cancer deserves further investigation.
We evaluated 401 endometrial carcinomas cases by using four immunomarkers - oestrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), insulin-like growth factor II mRNA - binding protein 3 (IMP3), and intestinal trefoil factor 3 (TFF3)-on a tissue microarray.
We recommend using an ER/PR/TFF3/IMP3 immunohistochemical panel in selected cases of endometrial carcinoma where the differential diagnosis is challenging.
By RT-PCR we have confirmed complete FAM107A downregulation in laryngeal cancer cell lines (15/15) and primary tumors (21/21) and this finding was further supported by FAM107A protein immunohistochemistry (15/15).
Downregulated in renal cell carcinoma 1 (DRR1) has important roles in tumor cell growth, neuron survival and spine formation, and was recently shown to bind actin.
In addition, DRR1 and COMMD1 suppressed the cyclin D1 expression, G1/S transition and cell proliferation of neuroblastoma cells.
Consistent with these facts, low expressions of DRR1 were associated with tumorigenesis of human neuroblastoma and its mouse model.
This study has thus revealed a novel nuclear complex of F-actin, DRR1 and COMMD1 that is involved in NF-KB degradation and cell cycle suppression in neuroblastoma cells.
The aim of the present study was to analyze the expression level of FAM107A gene, a TSG located in 3p21.1, in lung cancer tumors and in tumor adjacent normal lung samples.
Promoter methylation of FAM107A gene was confirmed only in the minority of NSCLCs.
We recently characterized a stress and glucocorticoid-regulated gene, down-regulated in renal cell carcinoma - DRR1 (Fam107A).
In human, FAM107A termed TU3A/DRR1 has been reported as a candidate tumor suppressor gene which expression is downregulated in several types of cancer, however no studies have investigated the other family protein, FAM107B.
Down-regulated in renal cell carcinoma 1 (DRR1) is mapped at 3p21.1, and is a candidate tumor suppressor gene.
DRR1 was poorly expressed in established cancer cell lines, including neuroblastoma cells, whereas strong expression was observed in normal cells.
A neuroblastoma model, MYCN transgenic mice, revealed that DRR1 protein was expressed in the celiac ganglion 2 weeks after birth when neuroblast hyperplasia was also observed; however, there was no longer any expression of DRR1 protein in tumors originating from the ganglion 8 weeks after birth.
Together, our data indicate that DRR1 protein is expressed in normal cells, particularly in the nervous system during embryogenesis, is involved in neuronal cell survival, and is downregulated during neuroblastoma carcinogenesis.
TU3A, located on 3p21.1, was originally identified as a candidate tumor suppressor gene in renal cell carcinoma (RCC).
Recently, down-regulation of TU3A expression has been reported not only in RCC but also in other types of cancers.
Furthermore, we observed promoter hyper-methylation of TU3A in several types of cancer cell lines and primary cancers of the bladder and testis.
To our knowledge, the present study is the first to demonstrate the epigenetic inactivation of TU3A in human cancers.
The findings of this study warrant further study to investigate the role of TU3A methylation in cancer development.
The aim of this study was to examine the association between GCK, GCKR, FADS1, DGKB/TMEM195 and CDKAL1 gene polymorphisms and the development of gestational diabetes.
Background Familial hemiplegic migraine type 3 is a monogenic subtype of migraine caused by missense mutations in the neuronal voltage-gated sodium channel gene SCN1A, with 10 different mutations reported so far.
Results In both pedigrees, we identified SCN1A mutation p.F1499L, which has been previously associated with familial hemiplegic migraine type 3 and elicited repetitive daily blindness.
Conclusion Like a substantial proportion of other familial hemiplegic migraine type 3 mutations, p.F1499L affects the intracellular linker between domains III and IV of SCN1A, which seems to be a mutational hot-spot.
A genetic link between these two diseases is particularly evident in familial hemiplegic migraine: mutations of ATP1A2, SCN1A and CACNA1A genes, identified in this disease, have also been involved in different types of epilepsy and febrile seizures.
Mutations in three genes (CACNA1A, ATP1A2, and SCN1A) have been found to cause FHM.
Among these, nine SCN1A gene mutations were reported to cause familial hemiplegic migraine type 3 (FHM3).
Method The clinical manifestations of a Chinese FHM family were recorded and all coding exons and flanking intronic regions of the CACNA1A, ATP1A2, and SCN1A genes were tested for mutations.
Conclusion The identification of a novel mutation in the SCN1A gene in the Chinese population may further aid in the understanding of FHM genetics.
Mutations in four genes have been identified in familial hemiplegic migraine (FHM), from which CACNA1A (FHM type 1) and SCN1A (FHM type 3) code for neuronal voltage-gated calcium or sodium channels, respectively, while ATP1A2 (FHM type 2) encodes the Alfa2 isoform of the Na(+),K(+)-ATPase's catalytic subunit, thus classifying FHM primarily as an ion channel/ion transporter pathology.
Moreover, three genes (CACNA1A, ATP1A2, and SCN1A) have come from studies performed in individuals with familial hemiplegic migraine (FHM), a monogenic form of migraine with aura.
The FHM3 subtype is caused by mutations in SCN1A, which is also the most frequent epilepsy gene encoding the voltage-gated Na+ channel NaV1.1.
The aim of this study was to explore the clinical, genetic and pathogenetic features of a pure FHM3 family.
Results and conclusions We identified a novel SCN1A (p.Leu1624Pro) mutation in a pure FHM family with notably early-onset attacks at mean age of 7.
L1624P locates in S3 of domain IV, the same domain as two of four known pure FHM3 mutations.
Similar to the known FHM3 mutations, this novel mutation predicts hyperexcitability of GABAergic inhibitory neurons.
Sixty patients with migraine without aura (MO) or with different types of migraine with aura (MA), including sporadic hemiplegic, familial hemiplegic, and probable familial hemiplegic, were screened for mutations in the four genes previously linked with different types of migraine (ATP1A2, CACNA1A, SCN1A, and KCNK18).
One novel mutation in SCN1A, encoding Alfa subunit of sodium channel, causing amino acid change M1500V localized to a region encoding inactivation loop between transmembrane domains III and IV of the channel, was detected in a female FHM patient.
The presence of SCN1A mutations and absence of mutations in ATP1A2 or CACNA1A suggest that the Polish patients represent FHM type 3.
Mutations of the voltage gated Na(+) channel Na(V)1.1 (SCN1A) are important causes of different genetic epilepsies and can also cause familial hemiplegic migraine (FHM-III).
A mutation causing FHM type 3 (FHM3) has been identified in SCN1A encoding the Nav1.1 Na(+) channel.
In particular, we investigate the dynamical repertoire from normal spiking (milliseconds) to spreading depression and anoxic depolarization (tens of seconds) and show that FHM3 mutations render gray matter tissue more vulnerable to spreading depression despite opposing effects associated with action potential generation.
PAR2 gene expression correlated positively with transcript levels of IL-8, IL-1Beta as well mucosal SLPI levels in H. pylori-infected patients (r: 0.47-0.84; p &lt; .0001), whereas no correlation was found with the degree of gastritis.
Mucosal levels of Secretory Leukocyte Protease Inhibitor (SLPI) are specifically reduced in relation to H. pylori-induced gastritis.
In contrast to other diseases, SLPI seems not to have a regulatory role for Progranulin in H. pylori-mediated gastritis.
SLPI expression is generally induced during inflammation; however, Helicobacter pylori-mediated gastritis is associated with significantly decreased antral SLPI levels.
SLPI expression was retrospectively analysed by immunohistochemistry in 85 paraffin-embedded samples: H. pylori-induced (n=13), non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID)-enhanced (n=18), autoimmune (n=11), lymphocytic gastritis (n=26) and H. pylori-negative controls (n=17).
In comparison with the control group, the SLPI expression of antral mucosa in H. pylori-mediated and lymphocytic gastritis was significantly lower (P&lt;0.001), whereas epithelial SLPI expression was not affected in NSAID-enhanced and autoimmune gastritis either in the antrum or corpus, respectively.
Both the H. pylori-mediated and lymphocytic gastritis revealed a significantly lower expression of SLPI in infiltrating immune cells (P&lt;0.01), whereas immune cells infiltrating the corpus in autoimmune gastritis showed higher SLPI levels than the immune cells of other groups (P&lt;0.03).
Antral SLPI levels were inversely correlated with inflammatory scores of antrum-predominant gastritis.
Pharmacological inhibition of different signaling pathways and genetic knockdown of Notch-2 further revealed JNK as an upstream effector of Notch-2 in TGF-Beta1-mediated renal fibrosis.
Consistently, we also demonstrated that administration of TSA or a Gamma-secretase inhibitor RO4929097 in the mouse model of unilateral ureteral obstruction significantly ameliorated renal fibrosis through suppression of the JNK/Notch-2 signaling activation.
Although, renal abnormalities are considered an integral part of the HJCYS, published reports on ESRD are scarce.
Here we show that Notch2 prevents podocyte loss and nephrosis.
Administration of a Notch2 agonistic monoclonal antibody ameliorates proteinuria and glomerulosclerosis in a mouse model of nephrosis and focal segmental glomerulosclerosis.
Hence, specific activation of Notch2 rescues damaged podocytes and activating Notch2 may represent a novel clinical strategy for the amelioration of nephrosis and glomerulosclerosis.
To investigate the effect of both fermented Cordyceps powder (CS) and prednisone on the Notch2/hes-1 signaling activation in the kidney tubules of rats with acute aristolochic acid nephropathy (AAAN).
The role of NOTCH2 and JAG1 in formation of proximal nephron structures and podocytes might explain the observed phenotypes of renal dysplasia and proteinuria in patients with Alagille syndrome, and renal tubular acidosis may be the result of JAG1 expression in the collecting ducts.
The oral pathogenic bacterium involved in human dental caries formation Streptococcus mutans, encodes for two carbonic anhydrase (CA, EC 4.2.1.1) one belonging to the Alfa- and the other one to the Beta-class.
Streptococcus mutans, the oral pathogenic bacterium provoking dental caries formation, encodes for a Beta-class carbonic anhydrase (CA, EC 4.2.1.1), SmuCA.
A carbonic anhydrase (CA, EC 4.2.1.1) denominated PgiCA, belonging to the Gamma-class, from the oral pathogenic bacteria Porphyromonas gingivalis, the main causative agent of periodontitis, was investigated for its inhibition profile with sulfonamides and one sulfamate.
Recently, an interaction between FIR (FUSE-Binding Protein-Interacting Repressor) and TFIIH/p89/XPB helicase was found to repress c-myc transcription and so might be important for suppressing tumor formation.
In XPB cells carrying mutant TFIIH, loop formation failed and the serum response was abnormal; RNAi depletion of FIR similarly disabled c-myc regulation.
Recently, an interaction between FUSE-binding protein-interacting repressor (FIR) and TFIIH/p89/XPB helicase was found to repress c-myc transcription and might be important for suppressing tumor formation.
Here, XPB and XPD mutations are shown to block transcription activation by the FUSE Binding Protein (FBP), a regulator of c-myc expression, and repression by the FBP Interacting Repressor (FIR).
The repression domain of FIR targeted only TFIIH's p89/XPB helicase, required at several stages in transcription, but not factors required for promoter selection.
To investigate the tissue expression and systemic levels of IL-32, as well as its cellular sources, in patients with HS in comparison with healthy donors and patients with two other inflammatory skin diseases: psoriasis and atopic dermatitis (AD).
IL-32 was upregulated in patients with HS in both lesional skin and serum when compared with healthy donors and patients with AD or psoriasis.
Using skin samples from patients with mycosis fungoides (n = 21), healthy volunteers (n = 17), and individuals with atopic dermatitis (n = 17) and psoriasis (n = 9), we found IL32 mRNA expression significantly higher in mycosis fungoides samples than in samples from benign inflammatory skin diseases, and its expression increases with disease progression.
Immunofluorescence staining demonstrated that IL-32 was expressed in AD lesional skin, whereas it was present in neither skin biopsy specimens from healthy donors nor in lesional skin from patients with psoriasis.
In this study, the expression profile of ASPP2 in choriocarcinoma was examined in comparison with normal placentas and hydatidiform moles, the latter being a type of GTD that carries malignant potential.
Downregulation of ASPP2 messenger RNA and protein was demonstrated in choriocarcinoma by quantitative PCR and immunohistochemistry.
ASPP2-transfected choriocarcinoma cells (JEG-3 and JAR) showed an increase in apoptosis and a decrease in cell migration as detected by TdT-mediated dUTP nick end labeling and wound healing assays, respectively, illustrating the complex action of ASPP2 on cell functions other than programmed cell death.
Taken together, we demonstrated a loss of tumor-suppressive ASPP2 in choriocarcinoma with effects on cell migration and apoptosis.
No correlation between erythrocyte TDP concentration and transketolase activity and/or alpha-ETK was observed in ESRD patients, either before or 10 h after administration.
Scores for VEGF, TIMP-1, TIMP-3, SLPI and PAI-1 were all increased in OA compared with PM, and higher scores were associated with greater chondropathy.
Concentrations of the plasminogen activators pro-urokinase, tissue plasminogen activator, plasminogen activator inhibitors 1 and 2 (PAI-1 and PAI-2), plasminogen, and fibrin split product D-dimer in synovial fluid (SF) and blood plasma of 29 patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) were compared with the concentrations of 18 patients with spondyloarthropathy (SpA).
Besides myeloperoxidase (MPO), which was used as the gold standard in differentiating AML from other type of ALs, the most specific markers for AML in our study were CD14 and CD64 (99.5 and 95.6%).
They were characterized as follows: (1) disease onset with initial signs/symptoms due to intractable otitis media with effusion or granulation, which did not respond to ordinary treatments such as antibiotics and insertion of tympanic ventilation tubes, followed by progressive hearing loss; (2) predominantly female (73%) and older (median age: 68 years); (3) predominantly myeloperoxidase (MPO)-ANCA-positive (60%), followed by proteinase 3 (PR3)-ANCA-positive (19%) and both ANCAs-negative (16%); (4) frequently observed accompanying facial palsy (36%) and hypertrophic pachymeningitis (28%); and (5) disease often involving lung (35%) and kidney (26%) lesions.
Effects of zolpidem were wide ranging (eg, improvement on the JFK Coma Recovery Scale-Revised, the Unified Parkinson Disease Rating Scale, and the Burke-Fahn-Marsden Dystonia Rating Scale) and generally lasted 1 to 4 hours before the participant returned to baseline.
The altered tissue steroid concentrations in endometriosis were in line with the expression of various steroidogenic enzymes in the lesions, of which HSD3B2 showed constantly high expression, whereas CYP11A1 expression was low.
Type III groups together 10 autoimmune diseases (autoimmune thyroid disease, myasthenia and/or thymoma, Sjoegren's syndrome, pernicious anaemia, idiopathic thrombocytopaenic purpura, Addison's disease, insulin-dependent diabetes, vitiligo, autoimmune haemolytic anaemia, systemic lupus erythematosus) for which a genetic predisposition (phenotype HLA B8 and/or DR3 or DR5) seems to be an important factor.
A significant increase in the frequency of HLA DR5 antigen was observed in patients with ARC mainly in purpura thrombocytopenic patients.
Genome-wide pathway analysis with the dysregulated genes after overexpression of either of the two miRs in MCF-7 breast cancer cell identified the "Cancer"- and "Cell signaling"-related pathway as the top pathway for miR-204 and miR-211, respectively.
In addition, a high association was observed between miR-204 and miR-211 expression in breast cancer tissue.
To shed light on their roles of miR-211 in breast cancer, the expression of miR-211 was examined by real-time RT-PCR in breast cancer and normal tissues.
MiR-211 is significantly downregulated in breast cancer.
MiR-211 re-expression suppressed cell growth, cell cycle, migration, and invasion in triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) cell line MDA-MB231.
The expression and the functional role of several miRNAs (miR-206, miR-31, miR-27a/b, miR-21, miR-92a, miR-205, miR-125a/b, miR-10b, miR-155, miR-146a/b, miR-335, miR-204, miR-211, miR-7, miR-22, miR-126, and miR-17) in breast cancer has been identified.
Quantitative RT-PCR analysis confirmed that miR-135b, miR-192, miR-194 and miR-211 were significantly up-regulated in radiation-induced mammary cancer compared with spontaneous cancer and normal mammary tissue.
The HBD/LD ratio in the measles patients two to three days after the onset of rash was significantly lower than that in control subjects (P less than 0.001).
UC treatment obviously reduced the expression levels of IL-2, IFN-Gamma, NF-KBp65, ICAM-1 and VEGF and increased inhibitory kappa B alpha (IKB-Alfa) expression in the grafts, where no obvious inflammatory cell infiltration or corneal neovascularization was found.
In contrast, none of other patients with MFM had necklace CBs except for one patient with reducing body myopathy.
Among the serums assessed, MMA levels showed a positive correlation to TNSr and KNPQ in the IPD patients with peripheral neuropathy (TNSr r = 0.882, p &lt; 0.001, KNPQ r = 0.710, p = 0.004), while Vitamin B12 and homocysteine showed no statistically significant correlation.
The serum MMA positively correlated with the severity of neuropathic pain and this can be used as a useful marker in assessment of peripheral neuropathy in Parkinson's disease.
Functional vitamin B12 deficiency, defined by elevated levels of the B12-dependent metabolites, methylmalonic acid (MMA), and/or homocysteine, despite normal B12 values, may cause neuropathy and is associated with disorders linked to increased oxidative stress.
CDC6 and GDF-9 expressions in 108 gallbladder adenocarcinomas, 15 gallbladder polyps, 35 chronic cholecystitis tissues, and 46 peritumoral tissues were detected using immunohistochemistry (IHC).
We demonstrated that positive CDC6 and GDF-9 expressions were significantly higher in adenocarcinomas than that in peritumoral tissues, polyps, and chronic cholecystitis (p &lt; 0.01).
Previously, we identified MFAP4 as a serum biomarker candidate for hepatic fibrosis and cirrhosis in hepatitis C patients.
The aim of the present study was to elucidate the potential of MFAP4 as biomarker for hepatic fibrosis with a focus on the differentiation of no to moderate (F0-F2) and severe fibrosis stages and cirrhosis (F3 and F4, Desmet-Scheuer scoring system).
Linear and logistic multivariate regression analyses were performed and nonparametric receiver operating characteristic-curves for cirrhosis were used to estimate cut-off points for pMFAP4.
Microfibrillar-associated protein 4 (MFAP4) is a systemic biomarker that is significantly elevated in samples from patients suffering from hepatic cirrhosis.
Tropomyosin and MFAP-4 demonstrated high serum levels in patients with hepatic cirrhosis of different causes.
A quantitative analysis of MFAP-4 serum levels in a large number of patients showed MFAP-4 as novel candidate biomarker with high diagnostic accuracy for prediction of nondiseased liver versus cirrhosis [area under receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) = 0.97, P &lt; 0.0001] as well as stage 0 versus stage 4 fibrosis (AUC = 0.84, P &lt; 0.0001), and stages 0 to 3 versus stage 4 fibrosis (AUC = 0.76, P &lt; 0.0001).
Low CRF had PARs of 9.3% and 10.5% for cancer mortality in subjects who had overweight and obesity, respectively.
The population attributable risks (PARs) were 0.41, 0.40 and 0.38 for total, CVD and cancer mortality, accordingly.
Mean EARs for lung cancer were 17.5 cases per 10,000 persons per year (PY) and 10.1 PY.
Mean EARs for breast cancer were 8.2 PY and 2.8 PY.
In addition, through activation of G-protein-coupled protease activated receptors (PARs) TF induces cell signaling that is related to cancer, angiogenesis and inflammation.
PARs are implicated in a wide range of diseases, such as cancer and inflammation.
Thrombin-induced activation of protease-activated receptors (PARs) represents a link between inflammation and cancer.
Frozen tunica vaginalis specimens from patients with adult-onset primary hydrocele testis and control male nonhydrocele patients were subjected to Western blot analysis for the detection of AQP1 and AQP3 proteins.
AQP1 protein expression in the tunica vaginalis was significantly higher in patients with adult-onset hydrocele testis than in the controls.
The densities of AQP1-expressing capillaries and lymphatic vessels were similar between the tunica vaginalis of the controls and those of hydrocele patients.
In conclusion, overexpression of the AQP1 protein in individual capillary endothelial cells of the tunica vaginalis may contribute to the development of adult-onset primary noncommunicating hydrocele testis as another aquaporin-related disease.
There are very few reports in the published literature of abdominal aortic aneurysm in patient with situs inversus totalis, all of whom underwent open aneurysm repair.
The authors describe a case of successfully repaired abdominal aortic aneurysm with a false aneurysm of the right external iliac artery in situs inversus totalis.
The surgical management of patients with abdominal aortic aneurysm in situs inversus totalis is discussed.
Collectively, the MLN CD11b- CD103+ PD-L1High DC subset probably takes up luminal antigens in the intestine, migrates to MLNs, and highly induces regulatory T cells through TGF-Beta activation.
Furthermore, Ye were found exclusively associated with CD103(+) DCs in the MLNs from wild-type mice, but not from CCR7(-/-) mice, demonstrating a CCR7 dependent transport of Ye by CD103(+) DCs from LP to the MLNs.
Although extensive studies have demonstrated the importance of the mesenteric lymph nodes (MLNs) and intestinal CD103(+) dendritic cells (DCs) in driving small intestinal tolerance to protein antigen, the structural and immunological basis of colonic tolerance remain poorly understood.
Despite tolerance development, CD103(+)CD11b(+) DCs, which are the major migratory DC population in the MLNs, and the tolerance-related retinoic acid-generating enzyme RALDH2 were virtually absent from the ILNs.
Here, we demonstrate that GVHD markedly enhances alloantigen presentation within the mesenteric lymph nodes (mLNs), mediated by donor CD103(+)CD11b(-) dendritic cells (DCs) that migrate from the colon under the influence of CCR7.
CD103(+) dendritic cells (DCs) continuously migrate from the intestine to the mesenteric lymph nodes (MLNs) and maintain tolerance by driving the development of regulatory T cells (Treg) in the gut.
Treatment with PBS followed by 1 single dose of VSL#3, 18 h before killing, was associated with a 2-fold increase in CD103(+)CD11c(+) dendritic cells in MLNs and PPs.
Reduced numbers of Th17 cells, suppressed interleukin (IL)-6 production by intestinal explants, and increased Tregs and CD103-positive regulatory dendritic cells in mesenteric lymph nodes (MLNs) were observed.
Thus, oral administration of C. kefyr ameliorated EAE by altering the microflora, accompanied by increased Tregs and CD103-positive regulatory dendritic cells in MLNs and decreased Th17 cells in the intestinal lamina propria.
The proportion of CD103 DCs in PPs and MLNs and IL-10-expressing CD4 T cells of PPs and the LP increased after indomethacin treatment.
The PP-null mice showed greater indomethacin-induced enteropathy, fewer CD103 DCs in their MLNs, and lower proportion of IL-10-expressing CD4 T cells of their LP than WT mice, regardless of commensal bacteria.
Naive splenic CD4 T cells co-cultured with CD103 DCs isolated from the MLNs of indomethacin-injected WT mice produced a higher amount of IL-10 compared with those co-cultured with CD103 DCs.
In rickets, on the other hand, no PTH/PTHrP receptor gene expression was observed in the growth plate from day 8 of a vitamin D-deficient diet.
These results suggest that alterations in the PTH/PTHrP receptor gene expression are associated with rickets but not with TD.
The reduction in the PTH/PTHrP receptor gene expression in rickets may be due to the high plasma levels of PTH.
What is more important is that the depressed-expression of Cav1.3 paralleled with enhanced-expression of Snapin was documented in atrial samples from atrial fibrillation (AF) patients.
Furthermore, inactivation of Cav1.3 channels promotes also atrial fibrillation and flutter in knockout mice suggesting that these channels can play a role in stabilizing atrial rhythm.
The significance of the tissue-specific expression of the channel is underpinned by our previous demonstration of atrial fibrillation in a Cav1.3 null mutant mouse model.
MRS studies (MRI 1.5 T unit) were performed in 49 patients with schizophrenia (30 with auditory hallucinations and 19 without auditory hallucinations) and 37 controls.
As a first step towards understanding the role of OPN in retinal degeneration (RD), we examined changes in OPN expression in a mouse model of RD induced by exposure to a blue light-emitting diode (LED).
Similarly, those who had retinal disease had higher osteopontin concentrations than those without (16.8+/-2 vs. 12.4+/-3 mg/L; p=0.005).
Recent studies show overexpressed ENAH in several cancer types, and ENAH correlates with tumor invasiveness.
This study aimed to investigate the expression and function of ENAH in primary gastric adenocarcinoma, and its prognostic significance.
We found significantly increased mRNA (P = 0.0283) and protein (P = 0.0301) expression of ENAH in gastric cancer tissues.
We also analyzed data of 155 gastric cancer cases from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and found that ENAH expression significantly correlated with age (P = 0.003), T stage (P = 0.023) and prognosis (P = 0.05).
Furthermore, the function of ENAH in cell proliferation, colony formation, cell migration and invasion of gastric cancer cells was analyzed in vitro.
Our research suggests that ENAH might play promoting functions in carcinogenesis and progression of gastric cancer, and may serve as a valuable prognostic marker for primary gastric adenocarcinoma patients.
We discovered and validated novel differences in the splicing of genes known to be relevant to lung cancer biology, such as NFIB, ENAH or SPAG9.
The expression of ENAH isoform 11a has been shown to be elevated in breast cancers that express HER2.
Loss of CLK2 in luminal breast cancer cells leads to the upregulation of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT)-related genes and a switch to mesenchymal splice variants of several genes, including ENAH (MENA).
We describe a woman with a metastatic neuroendocrine tumor who developed NME 6 years after diagnosis of the tumor.
The multiplex amplification reaction includes six STR loci from the European standard set of loci (ESS) for DNA databases (D3S1358, D8S1179, D21S11, THO1, FGA and VWA) as well as four additional STR systems selected for their robustness (D2S1338, D12S391, TPOX and D5S818) together with the sex-specific locus amelogenin.
No statistically significant associations at the genome-wide level were observed with shift work or chronotype, though based on raw P values and absolute effect sizes, there were suggestive associations in genes that have been previously linked with cancer (e.g., BACH2, JRK, RPS6KA2) and type-2 diabetes (e.g., KCNQ1).
BACH2, a B-cell-specific transcription factor, plays a critical role in oxidative stress-mediated drug resistance in mantle cell lymphoma (MCL); however, the biological functions of BACH2 and its regulation of B-cell malignancies in chronic hypoxic microenvironment have not been studied.
Next, we analyzed the contribution of BACH2 negativity to aggressiveness in EBV-positive B-cell lymphomas using FL-18 (EBV-negative) and FL-18-EB cells (FL-18 sister cell line, EBV-positive).
The mig gene of Streptococcus dysgalactiae, a major bovine mastitis pathogen, encodes two plasma protein-binding receptors, alpha2-macroglobulin (alpha2-M) and immunoglobulin G (IgG).
Two are novel associations (top single-nucleotide polymorphism rs379123 in MYO1D and rs9590614 in VMA8) located within genes that function in cell-cell signaling and cell migration, and five are in loci previously associated with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease susceptibility (HHIP, IREB2/CHRNA3, CYP2A6/ADCK, TGFB2, and MMP12).
Recent studies have implicated the soluble form of EPCR (sEPCR) in Wegener's granulomatosis, Behcet's disease, and systemic lupus erythematosus.
To assess the relevance of this plasma protein in Wegener's granulomatosis (WG), sEPCR levels were measured in sera obtained from WG patients and related to disease activity, sTM levels, and other known markers of disease activity.
The authors herein present a case of chronic cicatrizing conjunctivitis, cicatricial entropion, and trichiasis caused by a rare entity called linear IgA bullous dermatosis.
The etiology of blepharochalasis has yet to be fully elucidated, but histpathologic examinations indicate that elastolytic activity, immunoglobulin A (IgA), and other inflammatory processes might play a substantial role in the pathogenesis of the disease.
Neurological symptoms of patients with p.Cys89Tyr mutation in the CD59 gene include recurrent peripheral neuropathy resembling Guillain-Barre syndrome, characterized by sensory-motor demyelinating neuropathy with secondary axonal damage and moderate enhancement of the nerve roots on spine MRI, together with recurrent strokes and retinal involvement.
Three additional mutations in CD59, leading to loss of function, have been described, and overall, 12/12 (100%) of patients with any mutation presented with neurological symptoms; 11/12 (92%) patients presented with recurrent peripheral neuropathy, 6/12 (50%) with recurrent strokes, and 1/12 (8%) with retinal involvement.
The Epi4K consortium recently identified four de novo mutations in the Gamma-aminobutyric acid type A (GABAA ) receptor Beta3 subunit gene GABRB3 and one in the Beta1 subunit gene GABRB1 in children with epileptic encephalopathies (EEs) Lennox-Gastaut syndrome (LGS) or infantile spasms (IS).
A GABA(A) receptor Beta3 subunit mutation, G32R, has been associated with childhood absence epilepsy.
Foram pesquisados artigos escritos em ingles na base de dados PubMed com as palavras-chave "CPAP", "mask" e "obstructive sleep apnea".
Based on these data, we hypothesized that molecular imaging of microglia activation might serve as a tool to predict drug refractoriness of epilepsy.
Mutations in SLC9A6 have been reported in X-linked Christianson syndrome associating severe to profound intellectual deficiency and an Angelman-like phenotype with microcephaly, absent speech, ataxia with progressive cerebellar atrophy, ophthalmoplegia, epilepsy, and neurological regression.
Mutations of SLC9A6 may cause an X-linked clinical syndrome first described by Christianson in 1999 in which affected males exhibited profound intellectual disability, autism, drug-resistant epilepsy, ophthalmoplegia, mild craniofacial dysmorphism, microcephaly, and ataxia.
Socs2, plus five additional targets, further proved to comprise new EPOR/Jak2/Stat5 response genes (which are important for erythropoiesis during anemia).
Moreover, in in vivo models of atopic dermatitis and allergen-induced airway inflammation, SOCS2(-/-) mice show significantly elevated IgE, eosinophilia, type 2 responses, and inflammatory pathology relative to wild-type mice.
Heterozygous and homozygous disruption of SOCS2 alleles promoted 166 and 441% increases in tumor load in the small intestine, respectively, accelerated development of colon tumors, and caused severe anemia.
In myasthenia gravis, anti-Kv1.4 and anti-Lrp4 have been characterized as promising novel autoantibodies for the diagnosis of hitherto 'seronegative' myasthenia gravis.
To clarify the role of p33ING1b in tumorigenesis and progression of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), we examined the expression and subcellular localization of p33ING1b in 214 HNSCC cases in parallel with 60 dysplasia samples and 48 normal epithelium samples by immunohistochemistry, and analyzed correlations of expression of p33ING1b in HNSCC cases with clinicopathological variables, apototic index and expression of 14-3-3n, p300, p21 and PCNA.
Of 34 informative cases of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma, 68% of tumors showed loss of heterozygosity at chromosome 13q33-34, where the ING1 gene is located.
Because ING1 resides on the long arm of chromosome 13 (13q34) (a region frequently deleted in many tumor types), we sought to characterize its role in head and neck squamous-cell carcinoma (HNSCC).
To investigate the diagnostic utility of beta 2 microglobulin (B2-M) levels and analyze this correlation with the activity of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD).
We examined B2-M serum levels in 43 ulcerative colitis (UC) patients, 35 with Crohn's disease (CD) and 30 control subjects, using an enzymatic method.
Mean B2-M values were significantly higher in ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease patients than in healthy controls (UC 2.41 +/- 0.87 vs 1.71 +/- 0.44, P = 0.002; CD 2.24 +/- 1.01 vs 1.71 +/- 0.44, P = 0.033).
A sample of 250 AA participants (134 normotensive controls and 116 with SH (including 98 treatment controlled, SCH: severe controlled hypertension, and 18 treatment resistant, SRH: severe resistant hypertension)) from the Minority Health Genomics and Translational Research Bio-Repository Database (MH-GRID) in metro Atlanta had blood analyzed for apelin and visfatin and urine for 8-isoprostane.
The most commonly reported drug-related adverse events among patients receiving regorafenib in the GRID trial were hand-foot skin reaction, hypertension, diarrhoea and fatigue.
In rats with middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAo), a model of stroke, the transhemispheric migration of MHP36 cells labelled with the bimodal contrast agent GRID was detected on magnetic resonance images (MRI) up to 4 weeks following transplantation.
Results Compared with the ischemia reperfusion group, both serum cTnI content and myocardial infarct size in the PPENK group decreased; the expression of PINK1, parkin, p62 and LC3B were all up-regulated.
Early-onset preeclampsia and IUGR had the highest autophagy protein expression levels, while normal pregnancy and late-onset preeclampsia had the highest LC3B/Beclin-1 ratio.
Apoptosis, myocardial infarction size, heart function and myocardial LC3B expression were examined in an in vivo I/R model by the TUNEL assay, TTC/Evan blue staining, echocardiography and immunohistochemicalstaining, respectively.
Likewise, in vivo exosome injections in rats that underwent I/R injury significantly reduced apoptosis and the myocardial infarct size and upregulated myocardial LC3B expression as well as improved heart function.
The expression of the VAV proto-oncogene in 57 patients with chronic myeloproliferative disease (CMD), B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (B-ALL) and B-cell non-Hodgkin Lymphoma (B-NHL), and 61 with B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (B-CLL) was analysed.
In this regard, we report the identification of a HLA-A*0201 allele-restricted immunogenic DEPDC1-derived epitope, which is able to induce cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL) exerting a strong and specific functional response in vitro toward not only peptide-loaded cells but also triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) cells endogenously expressing the DEPDC1 protein.
Cross-species comparative genomics analysis of progression from pre-invasive ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) to invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC) revealed 16 genes with concomitant genomic alterations, CCNB2, UBE2C, TOP2A, CEP55, TPX2, BIRC5, KIAA0101, SHCBP1, UBE2T, PTTG1, NUSAP1, DEPDC1, HELLS, CCNB1, KIF4A, and RRM2, that may be involved in tumorigenesis and in the processes of invasion and progression of disease.
The objective of the study was to compare the diagnostic yield of home-made ELISA tests based on synthetic chimeric fibrin/filaggrin citrullinated peptides (CFFCPs) with CCP3 and CCP3.1 commercial tests to detect anti-citrullinated protein/peptide antibodies (ACPAs) in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients.
In the present study, we aimed to estimate the concentrations of cytokines (interleukin 6, IL-6, tumor necrosis factor-Alfa, TNF-Alfa) and auto-antibodies (rheumatoid factor IgM isotype, IgM-RF, antinuclear auto-antibodies, ANA, anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibodies IgG isotype, IgG anti-CCP3.1, anti-cardiolipin IgG isotype, IgG anti-aCL) in serum of patients with eRA (early rheumatoid arthritis) and HCVrA (hepatitis C virus-related arthropathy) and to assess the utility of IL-6, TNF-Alfa together with IgG anti-CCP and IgM-RF in distinguishing between patients with true eRA and HCVrA, in the idea of using them as differential immunomarkers.
Logistic regressions were used to investigate whether using both tests (anti-CCP2 and anti-CCP3) gives a better prediction of rheumatoid arthritis.
Binary logistic regressions indicated that the likelihood of having rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is significantly higher when testing positive on both CCP2 and CCP3 compared to CCP2 or CCP3 alone.
The presence of ACPA was determined by the visually read, qualitative rapid CCPoint(R) test (Euro-Diagnostica, Malmoe, Sweden) compared to routinely used ELISA assays (Immunoscan CCPlus(R)-Euro-Diagnostica, Sweden, and QuantLite(R) CCP3-INOVA Diagnostics Inc., USA), in the sera of 184 patients: early RA(n = 38), established RA (n = 84), inflammatory arthritis(n = 34) and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) (n = 28).
The role of costimulatory OX40-OX40 ligand (OX40L) interactions has been explored in the non-infectious pathology of influenza pneumonia.
Here, we describe a critical contribution of OX40L to infectious pathology, with OX40L deficiency, but not OX40 deficiency, resulting in decreased susceptibility to influenza viral infection.
In fact, the specific antibody against the sialylated site of OX40L exhibited therapeutic potency in mitigating the OX40L-mediated susceptibility to influenza.
Our data illustrate that the influenza-induced expression of OX40L on bronchiolar progenitors has pathogenic value to develop a novel therapeutic approach against influenza.
In total T cell cultures, at low Ag dose, 4-1BBL provided the most potent costimulus for influenza-specific CD8 T cell expansion, followed by B7.1 (CD80) and then OX40L.
Thus, OX40L costimulates human antiviral memory CD8 T cell responses largely through indirect effects and can enhance anti-influenza, anti-EBV, and anti-HIV responses, particularly in combination with 4-1BBL or B7.
The levels of expression of Bag-1 and Bcl-2 were higher in the cervical cancer group, but Cyto-C, AIF, caspase-3, and p-Akt were lower compared with the other two groups (p &lt; 0.05).
The co-chaperone protein Bcl-2-associated athanogene-1 (BAG-1) is overexpressed in breast cancer and has been incorporated in the oncotype DX and PAM50 breast cancer prognostic assays.
The BAG-1L isoform specifically binds to and increases the transcriptional activity of oestrogen receptor in cells, and in some, but not all studies, BAG-1 expression is predictive of clinical outcome in breast cancer.
A systematic review of published studies reporting BAG-1 (mRNA and/or protein) expression and clinical outcome in early breast cancer.
Increased levels of BAG-1 are associated with better breast cancer outcomes.
Bcl-2-associated athanogene 1 (Bag-1) is a multifunctional protein overexpressed in breast cancer and ductal carcinoma in situ.
When present in the nucleus Bag-1 is predictive of clinical outcome in breast cancer.
Overexpression of cytoplasmic BAG-1 has been associated with the increased survival and decreased response to treatment with tamoxifen (TAM) in breast cancer.
We attempted to assess the expression of BAG-1 in the human breast cancer cells that are resistant to treatment with 4-OH TAM and effect of altered BAG-1 expression on their sensitivity to 4-OH TAM.
Our study indicated that up and down regulations of the BAG-1 expression were associated with the decreased and increased sensitivity to 4-OH TAM in the estrogen receptor-positive (ER+) human breast cancer cell line MCF-7 respectively, and distinct isoforms of BAG-1 had different anti-apoptotic ability in breast cancer cells treated with the 4-OH TAM.
Analysis of BAG1 was performed on archival tumour blocks from patients from the anastrozole and tamoxifen arms of the ATAC trial of 5 years endocrine therapy in postmenopausal women with oestrogen receptor (ER)-positive primary breast cancer.
Immunohistochemical examination confirmed the diagnosis of thymic squamous carcinoma positive for CD5.
Total thyroidectomy was performed and histopathological evaluation revealed squamous cell carcinoma, which was confirmed by immunohistochemistry, showing diffuse positivity for CK7, CK19, CK34BetaE12, galectin-3, EGFR, focal positivity for p63 and negativity for TTF-1 and CD5.
GLUT-1, MUC-1, CD117, CD5, CEA, P63, CK19, CK5/6, CD1a and TdT were evaluated using 16 cases of type B3 thymoma and 20 cases of thymic squamous cell carcinoma.
The sensitivity of GLUT-1 or MUC-1 for thymic squamous cell carcinomas was highest (100%), followed by CK5/6 (95%), CD117 (90%), P63 (85%), CD5 (80%) and CEA (75%).
The specificities of CD5, CD117 and CEA for thymic squamous cell carcinomas all were 100%, next was MUC-1 (56.3%), followed by GLUT-1 (50%), P63 (25%), CK5/6 (12.5%).
The reactivity of GLUT-1, MUC-1, CD117, CD5, CEA, CD1a and TdT in thymic squamous cell carcinomas and type B3 thymomas had significant difference.
Usually a panel of markers is needed, if we combine GLUT-1 or MUC-1 which sensitivity for thymic squamous cell carcinomas is highest with CD5, CD117, CEA, CD1a or TdT which have high specificity, we can make the differential diagnosis effectively.
On the 8th (hepatitis) and 29th (cirrhosis) day, serum biochemistry parameters, hepatic concentrations of lipid peroxidation-related substances, protein expressions of Alfa-SMA, TGF-Beta, iNOS, eNOS, p-eNOS-Ser1177, p-eNOS-Thr496, VEGF, VEGFR2, p-VEGFR2, and liver histology were evaluated.
We aimed study impact of hepatocytic viral load, steatosis, and iron load on fibrosis in chronic hepatitis C and role of VEGF and VEGFR overexpression in cirrhotic cases in evolving HCC.
Antisense noncoding RNA in the INK4 locus (ANRIL), which was coded on the Chr9p21.3 loci, participates in the pathogenesis of tumor, coronary artery disease, type 2 diabetes mellitus, and other diseases.
Single nucleotide polymorphisms near the Ink4/Arf locus have been associated with type-2 diabetes mellitus.
Three recent studies demonstrate that complex and cancer type-specific interactions between c-Myc, MondoA and HIF-1Alfa underlie metabolism, tumourigenesis and drug response.
In triple-negative breast cancer, c-Myc blocks MondoA-dependent activation of TXNIP to stimulate aerobic glycolysis.
In contrast, in neuroblastoma, N-Myc requires MondoA for metabolic reprogramming and tumourigenesis.
Finally, the therapeutic response of BRAF(V600E) melanoma cells to vemurafenib requires downregulation of c-Myc and HIF-1Alfa and upregulation of MondoA-TXNIP, and the subsequent reprogramming away from aerobic glycolysis.
In this minireview we highlight the findings in these three studies and present a working model to explain why c-Myc and MondoA function cooperatively in some cancers and antagonistically in others.
In this issue of Cancer Cell, Carroll and colleagues describe the role of MondoA, a member of the Myc-Max-Mxd-Mxl transcription factor network (termed the extended Myc network herein), in Myc-mediated alterations in cancer cell metabolism and tumorigenesis.
Identification and knockdown of genes coregulated by Myc and MondoA have allowed us to define metabolic functions required by deregulated Myc and demonstrate a critical role for lipid biosynthesis in survival of Myc-driven cancer.
Furthermore, overexpression of a subset of Myc and MondoA coregulated genes correlates with poor outcome of patients with diverse cancers.
Coregulation of cancer metabolism by Myc and MondoA provides the potential for therapeutics aimed at inhibiting MondoA and its target genes.
Remarkably, this network of transcription factors, including hypoxia-inducible factor-1Alfa, MYC, and MONDOA (MLXIP), drives glycolysis downstream of BRAF(V600), is critical for responses to BRAF inhibition, and is modulated by BRAF inhibition in clinical melanoma specimens.
TOP2A and TLE3 protein expressions were evaluated using immunohistochemistry on 28 samples, obtained by core needle biopsy in patients with locally advanced breast carcinoma, subsequently subjected to epirubicin- and paclitaxel-based neoadjuvant chemotherapy.
Data from the current study suggest that TOP2A and TLE3 warrant further investigation in a larger series as predictors of response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy for locally advanced breast carcinoma.
We studied a series of angiosarcoma with TLE3 immunohistochemistry.
TLE3 reactivity was observed in 0/37 (0%) cutaneous angiosarcomas, in 28/48 (58%) cases from soft tissue/viscera and in 4/13 (31%) post-irradiation angiosarcomas.
A lack of TLE3 expression in cutaneous angiosarcoma may reflect differing pathogenesis.
We confirmed that the monoclonal antibody to G-Rg3 can be applied to immunocytochemistry for detection of the treated G-Rg3 inside A549 human lung adenocarcinomas.
In human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-positive breast cancer, GSDMB gene amplification and protein overexpression indicate a poor response to HER2-targeted therapy.
We found increased GSDMB1 isoform transcripts in the cancerous and non-cancerous tissues from carriers of the G allele vs. carriers of the A/A genotype.
Here, using an in silico analysis of data from 2,096 breast tumours, we reveal a significant correlation between Gasdermin B (GSDMB) gene (located 175 kilo bases distal from ERBB2) expression and the pathological and clinical parameters of poor prognosis in HER2-positive breast cancer.
In summary, our data identifies the ERBB2 co-amplified and co-expressed gene GSDMB as a critical determinant of poor prognosis and therapeutic response in HER2-positive breast cancer.
Because GSDMB is expressed in many types of cancer, including GC, it is likely that the gene contains a regulatory region that is utilized for therapy of occult PD through cancer cell-specific expression of cytotoxic genes.
Gasdermin B expression has been detected in some tumor types such as hepatocarcinomas, gastric and cervix cancers; and its over-expression has been related to tumor progression.
At least four splicing isoforms of GSDMB have been identified, which may play differential roles in cancer.
Here, we uncover for the first time the functional implication of GSDMB in breast cancer.
Our data shows that high levels of GSDMB expression is correlated with reduced survival and increased metastasis in breast cancer patients included in an expression dataset (&gt;1,000 cases).
In order to evaluate the functional role of GSDMB in breast cancer two GSDMB isoforms were studied (GSDMB-1 and GSDMB-2).
Taken together, our results provide for the first time evidences that GSDMB-2 induces invasion, tumor progression and metastasis in MCF7 cells and that GSDMB can be considered as a new potential prognostic marker in breast cancer.
Given that GSDMB is highly expressed in cancerous cells and the locus resides in an amplicon, GSDMB may be involved in cancer development and/or progression.
However, only limited information is available on GSDMB expression in tissues, normal and cancerous, from cancer patients.
We investigated the spatiotemporal expression patterns of GSDMB in gastric cancer patients and the 5' regulatory sequences upstream of GSDMB.
Most pre-cancer samples showed moderate GSDMB expression, and most cancerous samples showed augmented GSDMB expression.
Patients were divided into three groups according to the severity of fibrosis on biopsy: mild (F0-1), moderate (F2-4), severe (F5-6) liver disease and into two groups according to the NI grading, low (NI 0-3) and high inflammation (NI &gt;=4).
The low fibrosis (F1-2) group included 56 patients, the high fibrosis group (F3-6) included 88 patients, and the cirrhosis group (F5-6) included 38 patients.
The promoter methylation status of UCHL1, FLNC, THBS1, and DLEC1 was assessed by quantitative methylation-specific PCR (QMSP) in the serum of 82 GC patients, 46 chronic atrophic gastritis (CAG) subjects, and 40 healthy controls.
Significant fibrosis was defined as F3-6 and cirrhosis as F5-6.
On liver biopsy, 132 (22%) had cirrhosis (Ishak F5-6) in the training set and 19 (18%) in the validation set.
Kaplan-Meier analysis demonstrated that steatosis impacted on time to progression to both significant fibrosis (Ishak &gt; or =F3) and cirrhosis (Ishak F5-6) (P = 0.001 and P = 0.049, respectively).
We aimed to investigate the cellular source of secreted protein acidic and rich in cysteine (SPARC) in gastric cancer tissues and the relationship between SPARC expression and its prognostic significance.
The present study aimed to investigate the molecular mechanism of breast cancer to bone metastasis of secreted protein acidic and rich in cysteine (SPARC).
To investigate tumor microenvironment of metastasis (TMEM) and the expression of SPARC (secreted protein acidic and rich in cysteine) in gastric cancer, and their relationships with hematogenous metastasis.
In this study, we investigated the expression status of secreted protein acidic and rich in cysteine, periostin, fibroblast-activated protein, and the newly developed proCOL11A1 antibody in the stroma of surgically resected pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas and their prognostic implications.
Tissue microarrays were constructed from 155 surgically resected pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas and paired non-neoplastic pancreata and from another independent set of 48 normal/benign pancreata, and immunohistochemical stains were performed for proCOL11A1, fibroblast-activated protein, secreted protein acidic and rich in cysteine, and periostin.
proCOL11A1, fibroblast-activated protein, secreted protein acidic and rich in cysteine, and periostin expression was significantly increased in the intratumoral stroma of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas compared to paired non-neoplastic pancreata (proCOL11A1: 145/155 (93.5%) vs 26/154 (16.9%); fibroblast-activated protein: 139/143 (97.2%) vs 82/132 (62.1%); secreted protein acidic and rich in cysteine: 113/150 (75.3%) vs 49/132 (37.1%); periostin: 135/151 (89.4%) vs 45/135 (33.3%); p &lt; 0.001, all).
Secreted Protein Acidic and Rich in Cysteine (SPARC/osteonectin) is an extracellular matrix-associated glycoprotein involved in the regulation of cell proliferation and cell migration in several types of cancers.
MYCN expression and amplification were studied in five alveolar and five embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma cell lines and in 19 tumour biopsies.
Similarly, MYCN protein was detected in all cell lines by western blot analysis, with higher levels of expression in alveolar than in embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma cells.
Although MYCN expression was higher in alveolar than in embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma cell lines, no clear relationship between histology and level of MYCN expression could be established in this tumour series.
A single, large randomised-controlled-trial (ORACLE Childhood Study II) found an increased risk of childhood cerebral palsy and possibly epilepsy following prophylactic antibiotic use in pregnant women with spontaneous preterm labour.
Inclusion criteria were trials containing remission data on patients with confirmed pure class V (Va and Vb) membranous lupus nephritis.
Va-Vd), elimination of the normal category (WHO class I), clearer definitions for all classes, a standard approach to sclerotic glomeruli, and the division of lupus nephritis class IV into subcategories based on whether the endocapillary involvement is predominantly segmental (lupus nephritis IV-S) or global (lupus nephritis IV-G).
The initial creatinine in patients with classes Va and Vb lupus nephritis predicted follow-up renal function.
Nineteen had type Va and the rest type Vb nephritis.
Fifteen cases of epithelioid peritoneal mesothelioma and 40 cases of papillary serous carcinoma of the ovary (25 primary and 15 metastatic to the peritoneum) were immunostained for h-CD, D2-40, calretinin, cytokeratin 5/6, thrombomodulin, estrogen and progesterone receptors (ER and PR), Ber-EP4, B72.3, CA19-9, and CD15.
A total of 40 peritoneal epithelioid mesotheliomas and 45 serous carcinomas of the ovary (15 primary, 30 metastatic to the peritoneum) were investigated for the expression of the following markers: D2-40, podoplanin, calretinin, keratin 5/6, thrombomodulin, MOC-31, Ber-EP4, B72.3 (TAG-72), BG-8 (Lewis(Y)), CA19-9, and leu-M1 (CD15).
All 45 (100%) serous carcinomas were positive for Ber-EP4, 98% for MOC-31, 73% for B72.3, 73% for BG-8, 67% for CA19-9, 58% for leu-M1, 31% for keratin 5/6, 31% for calretinin, 13% for D2-40, 13% for podoplanin, and 4% for thrombomodulin.
A retrospective study Tertiary referral center In this study, 13 patients who developed facial paralysis due to temporal bone trauma and undergone decompression by using MCF approach in Department of Otorhinolaryngology of Izmir Katip Celebi University Research and Training Hospital between January 1993 and December 2012 were presented retrospectively.
The SNP rs11628722 in the SERPINA9 gene was previously associated with incident ischemic stroke in the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) study.
Replications in other populations are needed to validate findings of this study and to establish the SERPINA9 gene as a candidate in the etiology of carotid atherosclerosis.
Our results indicate that transcriptions of SsADH4 and SsADH6 were highly induced under furfural and HMF stress conditions, and the proteins encoded by them exhibited NADH- and/or NADPH-dependent activities for furfural and HMF reduction, respectively.
Crystal structures of SySSADH were determined in their apo form, as a binary complex with NADP(+) and as a ternary complex with succinic semialdehyde and NADPH, providing details about the catalytic mechanism by revealing a covalent adduct of a cofactor with the catalytic cysteine in the binary complex and a proposed thiohemiacetal intermediate in the ternary complex.
Further, BCO2 is associated with the development of mitochondrial oxidative stress, macular degeneration, anemia, and hepatic steatosis.
Our findings indicate that specific BCMO1 SNPs should be determined when assessing the effects of carotenoid supplementation on macular pigment and that their expression may be influenced by retinal disease.
We report quantification by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) of KLK5, KLK6, KLK7, KLK8, KLK10, KLK11, KLK13 and KLK14 in the SC and serum of atopic dermatitis (AD) patients by ELISA, and examine their variation with clinical phenotype, correlation with blood levels of eosinophils, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and immunoglobulin E. The overall SC serine protease activities were also measured.
Amlexanox increased COL7A1 transcript and the phosphorylation of UPF-1, an RNA helicase associated with nonsense-mediated mRNA decay, suggesting that amlexanox inhibits nonsense-mediated mRNA decay in cells from patients with RDEB that respond to read-through treatment.
the human homolog of the yeast Upf1 protein), was upregulated in GABEB keratinocytes.
We also analyzed the relationship between the Caspr family and neurodegenerative diseases, multiple sclerosis, and autoimmune encephalitis.
Here we have shown a novel function of Caspr in pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD).
We analysed by immunohistochemistry on free-floating sections from multiple sclerosis brains the expression and distribution of nodal (Na(v) channels), paranodal (paranodin/Caspr) and juxtaparanodal (K(v) channels and Caspr2) molecules in demyelinated and remyelinated lesions.
In the present study, antibodies to Caspr were used to assess the integrity of paranodal junctions on myelinated axons in brain and spinal cord tissue from subjects with longstanding multiple sclerosis, a neurological disorder that affects both myelin and axons.
Triple immunofluorescence combined with confocal laser scanning microscopy showed that axons in the demyelinated centre of the 36 brain and 16 spinal cord multiple sclerosis lesions studied were devoid of Caspr immunoreactivity, suggesting that axons down regulate the expression of Caspr following demyelination.
Interestingly, alterations in the expression and localization of Caspr were observed in tissue from both subjects with the primary and secondary progressive form of multiple sclerosis.
This study was divided into two phases: firstly, marker (miR-95, miR-18a, miR-10b, miR125a, and miR-378) detection by real-time quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) in sera from HBV patients with HCC (n = 15) and health subject (n = 15); and, secondly, marker validation by real-time qRT-PCR on HBV patients with HCC (n = 86) or hepatitis or cirrhosis (n = 30), and healthy subject (n = 45).
MiR-18a yielded an area under the curve (AUC) of ROC of 0.881 with 86.1 % sensitivity and 75.0 % specificity in discriminating HBV-related HCC from healthy controls, and an AUC of ROC of 0.775 with 77.2 % sensitivity and 70.0 % specificity in discriminating HBV-related HCC from chronic hepatitis or cirrhosis.
These studies suggest that monoclonal antibodies (infliximab and adalimumab) are superior to the soluble TNF receptor fusion protein etanercept for the treatment of scleritis in patients that do not respond to corticosteroids and/or to immunosuppressive treatment.
To describe 3 cases of scleritis associated with etanercept use for rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and to review the literature related to inflammatory eye diseases associated with the use of etanercept.
Three cases of severe scleritis during etanercept therapy were analyzed.
Three patients with seropositive RA developed scleritis 7-28 months after initiation of etanercept, for the first time during their long-lasting disease.
Forty-two cases of inflammatory eye diseases believed to be associated with the use of etanercept have been reported in the literature: 33 uveitis, 8 scleritis, 1 orbital myositis, concerning 16 patients with RA, 10 with juvenile idiopathic arthritis, 14 with ankylosing spondylitis, and 2 with psoriatic spondyloarthropathy.
A 55-year-old man with RA, on etanercept and oral methotrexate, was referred with diagnosis of acute stromal keratitis, anterior uveitis, and anterior nodular scleritis in his right eye.
We report three cases of female patients who presented a first episode of unilateral scleritis or acute anterior uveitis while they were treated for 12-16 months by TNF inhibitor: etanercept (Enbrel((R))) 25mg twice weekly for rheumatologic diseases (rheumatoid arthritis or ankylosing spondylitis).
Seventeen cases of inflammatory eye disease (uveitis, scleritis, orbital myositis) believed to be associated with etanercept therapy were found in the recent literature.
We hypothesized that a cystatin C calculated glomerular filtration rate would be more sensitive than the standard creatinine based modified Schwartz equation to detect renal insufficiency in children with congenital neuropathic bladder.
We prospectively identified children with congenital neuropathic bladder at a multidisciplinary spina bifida clinic who underwent serum creatinine and serum cystatin C testing.
In children with neuropathic bladder the cystatin C estimated glomerular filtration rate is a better screening test for early renal insufficiency that is not detected by creatinine based rate calculations.
The CKD-EPI equation using cystatin C was the most precise method of renal function evaluation in patients with neurogenic bladder.
Seipin deficiency results in lipodystrophy, diabetes, muscle hypertrophy, and male infertility in both human and mouse.
The objectives of this study were to 1) characterize the anthocyanin profile of Java plum using HPLC-MS; and 2) determine the anti-proliferative (cell counting and MTT) and pro-apoptotic (TUNEL and caspase 3/7 glo assay) properties of Java plum fruit extract (JPE) using HCT-116 colon cancer cell line and colon CSCs (positive for CD 44, CD 133 and ALDH1b1 markers).
In summary, our data demonstrate that ALDH1B1 may promote colon cancer tumorigenesis by modulating the Wnt/Beta-catenin, Notch and PI3K/Akt signaling pathways.
Selective targeting of ALDH1B1 may represent a novel means to prevent or treat colon cancer.
Compared to normal colon tissue metastatic colon cancers from different patients were associated with increased ALDH1B1 expression (p=0.001) whereas CD29 expression was higher in normal colonic tissue (p=0.014).
Our study demonstrates that ALDH1B1 is more profoundly expressed in the adenocarcinomas examined in this study relative to ALDH1A1 and that ALDH1B1 is dramatically upregulated in human colonic adenocarcinoma, making it a potential biomarker for human colon cancer.
The following combinations of main keywords were used: ('Lymphotoxin-alpha' or 'LTA' or 'tumour necrosis factor beta' or 'TNF-beta') and ('Ischemic stroke or 'cerebral infarction' or 'IS') and ('genetic polymorphism' or 'single nucleotide polymorphisms' or 'SNP').
Associations between variations in the lymphotoxin-alpha gene (LTA) and myocardial infarction, cerebral infarction and type 1 diabetes have previously been reported.
We investigated two genetic polymorphisms in the TNF locus (TNF-alpha -308 G--&gt;A and TNF-beta +252 A--&gt;G) as risk factors for cerebral infarction (CI) by determining its prevalence in 294 survivors of CI, and in 581 age-, gender-, and race-matched controls.
In 17 individuals with autoimmune thrombocytopenic purpura the levels of free haptoglobins were assessed after carefully ruling out microangiopathic hemolysis, systemic lupus erythematosus or overt Evans syndrome.
The differential diagnosis for these extraskeletal osseous and cartilaginous lesions includes soft-tissue sarcoma, benign mesenchymoma, malignant mesenchymoma (rare), calcified tophi in gout, melorheostosis (rare), pilomatricoma (rare), and tumoral calcinosis (rare).
The human muscleblind-like proteins (MBNL) regulate tissue-specific splicing by targeting cardiac troponin T and other pre-mRNAs; aberrant targeting of CUG and CCUG repeat expansions frequently accompanies the neuromuscular disease myotonic dystrophy.
MBNL activity is disrupted in the neuromuscular disease myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1), due to the instability of a non-coding microsatellite in the DMPK gene and the expression of CUG expansion (CUGexp) RNAs.
Subjects were then administered a CRF1 antagonist, antalarmin.
EOD-induced alcohol consumption was insensitive to CRFR1 blockade by antalarmin, but subjects with high CSF levels of CRF were more responsive.
The present study evaluated the effect of systemic injection of the CRF1 receptor antagonist R121919, the corticosterone synthesis inhibitor metyrapone and central amygdala (CeA) injections of the nonselective CRF antagonist D-Phe-CRF(12-41) in rats in which binge eating was evoked by stress and cycles of food restriction.
These findings demonstrate that extra-hypothalamic CRF1 receptors, rather than those involved in endocrine functions, are involved in binge eating and the crucial role of CRF receptors in CeA.
CRF1 receptor antagonism may represent a novel pharmacological treatment for binge-related eating disorders.
Current clinical and pre-clinical data suggest that both cannabinoid agents and blockage of CRF through corticotrophin releasing factor receptor type 1 (CRFr1) may offer therapeutic benefits for post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).
Intra-BLA and intra-CA1 microinjection of the CRFr1 antagonist, CP-154,526 attenuated startle response.
Finally, mRNA levels of CRF, CRFr1 and CB1r were significantly higher in the BLA of rats exposed to shock and reminders compared to non-shocked rats almost one month after the shock.
Taken together, the results show that enhancing endocannabinoid signaling in the amygdala and hippocampus produced a more favorable spectrum of effects than those caused by the CRFr1 antagonist.
We established that all genes of the CRF system, the ligands CRFa, CRFb, urotensin 1 (UTS1), and urocortin 3 (UCN3); the two receptor subtypes (CRFR1 and CRFR2); and the binding protein (CRFBP) are expressed in the heart of zebrafish: crfr1 &gt; crfr2 = crfbp &gt; crfa &gt; ucn3 &gt; crfb &gt; uts1 In vivo, exposure to 5% O2 saturation for 15 min and 90 min of recovery resulted in four- to five-fold increases in whole heart crfb and ucn3 mRNA levels but did not affect the gene expression of other CRF system components.
The aim of this study was to examine the effects of non-peptide corticotropin-releasing factor receptor 1 (CRF1) antagonist (antalarmin) administration on rat conditioned fear responses and gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-ergic brain activity (GAD67 expression and GABA concentration) in low-anxiety (LR) and high-anxiety (HR) rats.
These studies showed that HR rats were more susceptible to the anxiolytic effects of CRF1 antagonist administration, which were associated with increased GABAergic activity in the medial prefrontal cortex and amygdala.
The noncalcemic analogs showed similar efficacy to 1,25(OH)2D3 in stimulating the expression of neuropeptides, CRF, urocortins and POMC, and their receptors, CRFR1, CRFR2, MC1R, MC2R, MC3R and MC4R.
Finally-based on the previously demonstrated role of corticotropin-releasing factor 1 (CRF1) receptor inhibition in blocking WCE-induced cytokine mRNAs-the CRF1 receptor antagonist CP154,526 was administered to a subgroup of stressed rats and found to be inactive against induction of CCL2, TNFAlfa, or IL-1Beta mRNAs.
It expresses a variety of neurotransmitters, neuropeptides and receptors such as 5-HT1A, D2 and CRF1 receptors.
Activation of corticotropin-releasing factor type 1 receptors (CRF-R1) in the ventral tegmental area (VTA) represents a critical mechanism for social defeat to escalate cocaine self-administration in adult rats.
We determined the acute effect of a CRF-R1 antagonist (CP376395) microinfusion into the VTA prior to each episode of social defeat in adolescent rats and determined whether this drug treatment could prevent later escalation of cocaine taking in early adulthood.
Episodes of social defeat stress engender neuroadaptation in CRF-R1s in the VTA that alter coping with social stress and that persist into adulthood.
Signaling by the corticotropin-releasing factor receptor type 1 (CRFR1) plays an important role in mediating the autonomic response to stressful challenges.
Although CRFR1 is highly expressed in the arcuate nucleus (Arc) of the hypothalamus, the identity of these neurons and the role of CRFR1 here are presently unknown.
Our studies show that nearly half of Arc-CRFR1 neurons coexpress agouti-related peptide (AgRP), half of which originate from POMC precursors.
Arc-CRFR1 neurons are innervated by CRF neurons in the hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus, and CRF application decreases AgRP(+)CRFR1(+) neurons' excitability.
Despite similar anatomy in both sexes, only female mice selectively lacking CRFR1 in AgRP neurons showed a maladaptive thermogenic response to cold and reduced hepatic glucose production during fasting.
Thus, CRFR1, in a subset of AgRP neurons, plays a regulatory role that enables appropriate sympathetic nervous system activation and consequently protects the organism from hypothermia and hypoglycemia.
Finally, immunostaining of thin layer chromatograms with antibodies from patients with cutaneous leishmaniasis suggests that the major GIPLs are highly immunogenic and that the elevated anti-Gal antibodies, commonly seen in leishmaniasis patients, may be directed against terminal Galp(alpha 1-3)Galf residues.
Here we report that most skin-infiltrating lymphocytes in patients suffering from psoriasis, atopic or allergic-contact dermatitis express CCR10.
Knockdown of FOXA1 in RT4 bladder cancer cells resulted in increased expression of UPK1B, UPK2, UPK3A, and UPK3B, decreased E-cadherin expression and significantly increased cell proliferation, while overexpression of FOXA1 in T24 cells increased E-cadherin expression and significantly decreased cell growth and invasion.
Schwartz-Jampel syndrome is a very rare congenital myotonic syndrome with typical phenotypic and electrophysiological features.
To better understand their role in muscle fibrosis, we investigated expression of decorin and biglycan transcripts and protein in muscle of several forms of muscular dystrophy, and also expression of perlecan, an extracellular proteoglycan unrelated to collagen deposition.
We determined the association between haplotypes of FcGammaRIIA-131Arg/His, FcGammaRIIIA-176F/V and FcGammaRIIIB-NA1/NA2 variants and severe malarial anemia (SMA; hemoglobin &lt; 6.0 g/dL, any density parasitemia) in children (n = 274; aged 6-36 months) presenting for their first hospital visit with P. falciparum malaria in a holoendemic transmission region of western Kenya.
In contrast, significantly increased levels of BLyS were only observed in patients with Wegener's granulomatosis (WG), but not in patients with microscopic polyangiitis (mPAN)/Churg-Strauss-syndrome (CSS).
In humans, BLyS overexpression is common in patients with several rheumatic diseases, including SLE, rheumatoid arthritis (RA), Sjoegren's syndrome, scleroderma, Wegener's granulomatosis, and ANCA-associated vasculitis.
The pathology specimens from the patients were retrieved, their pathologic diagnosis was confirmed, demographic and clinical information were gathered, and sections from vascular tumors were stained with vascular endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGFR), vascular endothelial growth factor receptor type 1 (VEGFR1), vascular endothelial growth factor receptor type 2 (VEGFR2), and vascular endothelial growth factor receptor type 3 (VEGFR3).
Specifically, this article will focus on the following aspects: (1) pathological and molecular features of epithelioid hemangioendothelioma, including the more common WWTR1-CAMTA1 fusion, as well as the recently described YAP1-TFE3 fusion, identified in a morphological variant of epithelioid hemangioendothelioma; (2) discuss the heterogeneity of angiosarcoma clinical, morphological and genetic spectrum, with particular emphasis of MYC and FLT4 gene amplification in radiation-induced angiosarcoma; and (3) provide a practical guide in the differential diagnosis of epithelioid vascular tumors using molecular testing.
The content of skMLCK and myosin-activating protein kinases: RhaA-activated protein kinase (ROCK), integrin-linked protein kinase (ILK), and zipper-interacting protein kinase (ZIPK) was compared in normal human myocardium and the hearts of patients with dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM).
The lymphoma strongly and diffusely expressed CD158k/KIR3DL2 at the protein and transcript level and NKp46 transcripts, in addition to CD8 and cytotoxic proteins.
Notably, 16 (20%) of 82 mature T-cell neoplasms, particularly T-cell large granular lymphocytic leukemia, mycosis fungoides, and ALK+ anaplastic large cell lymphoma, aberrantly expressed CD335.
Sera from 611 patients with scleroderma, CREST (calcinosis, Raynaud's phenomenon, esophageal dysmotility, sclerodactyly, telangiectasias), Raynaud's disease, and connective tissue disease control patients were studied by ELISA using the fusion protein CENP-B, by immunofluorescence on dividing HEp-2 cells, and by immunoblotting on chromosomes and CENP-B.
Less striking effects for mRNA levels were observed for MTX1 at 1q22 in gastric cardia adenocarcinoma and for JRK at 8q24.3 in diffuse GC.
To evaluate whether parallel radiofrequency transmission (mTX) can improve the symmetry of the left and right femoral arteries in dynamic contrast enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (DCE-MRI) of prostate and bladder cancer.
Subsequently, 21 prostate and 21 bladder cancer patients were scanned using the dual channel mTX upgrade.
S0_LRasym, and MER_LRasym were 0.21 and 0.19 for prostate cancer patients with mTX, and 0.43 and 0.45 for the ones imaged without it (P &lt; 0.001).
Also, for the bladder cancer patients, S0_LRasym, and MER_LRasym were 0.11 and 0.9 with mTX, while imaging without it yielded 0.52 and 0.39 (P &lt; 0.001).
Although methotrexate (mtx) is a widely used agent to treat cancer and inflammatory diseases, its hepatotoxic effect limits for clinical utility.
We identified 11 variants significantly associated with disease risk and assessed to have a high level of summary evidence: MUC1 rs2070803 at 1q22 (diffuse carcinoma subgroup), MTX1 rs2075570 at 1q22 (diffuse), PSCA rs2294008 at 8q24.2 (non-cardia), PRKAA1 rs13361707 5p13 (non-cardia), PLCE1 rs2274223 10q23 (cardia), TGFBR2 rs3087465 3p22 (Asian), PKLR rs3762272 1q22 (diffuse), PSCA rs2976392 (intestinal), GSTP1 rs1695 11q13 (Asian), CASP8 rs3834129 2q33 (mixed) and TNF rs1799724 6p21.3 (mixed), with the first nine variants characterised by a low FPRP.
The randomized international trial for childhood anaplastic large cell lymphoma, (ALCL99-R1) involving European study groups and a Japanese group, compared six courses of methotrexate 1 g/m(2) over 24 hours with an intrathecal injection (IT) (MTX1 arm) with six courses of methotrexate 3 g/m(2) over 3 hours without IT (MTX3 arm).
Genes with DMRs were involved in inflammatory response (IRAK4 and ESM1), cancer (BRCA1 and LASP1), endocrine function (CNPY1), and male fertility (IFT140, TESC, and PRDM8).
We reported previously that tescalcin (TESC) levels were higher in tissue and serum from colorectal cancer (CRC) patients and suggested that TESC was a potential oncotarget in CRC.
Tescalcin (TESC) is an EF-hand calcium binding protein that is differentially expressed in several tissues, however it is not reported that the expression and functional roles of TESC in colorectal cancer.
Levels of messenger RNA (mRNA) and protein expression of TESC in colorectal cancer tissues were assessed using RT-PCR, real time PCR, immunohistochemistry, and clinicopathologic analyses.
Colorectal cancer cells transfected with TESC small interfering RNA and short hairpin RNA were examined in cell proliferation assays, phospho-MAPK array, and mouse xenograft models.
Here we demonstrated that TESC is overexpressed in colorectal cancer (CRC), but was not expressed in normal mucosa and premalignant dysplastic lesions.
Thus, TESC is a potential diagnostic marker and oncotarget in colorectal cancer.
We then investigated tescalcin and CSN activity in human erythroleukemia HEL and promyelocytic leukemia K562 cells and find that phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA)-induced differentiation, resulting in the upregulation of tescalcin, coincides with reduced deneddylation of cullin-1 (Cul1) and stabilization of p27(Kip1) - molecular events that are associated with CSN activity.
We hypothesized that a gene encoding tescalcin (TESC), known to be upregulated at leukemia progression during continuous sorafenib treatment and activate an Na(+)/H(+) exchanger type-1 (NHE1), may underlie tyrosine kinase inhibitor resistance.
Here we show that tescalcin is expressed in primary human granulocytes and is upregulated in human promyelocytic leukemia HL-60 cells that have been induced to differentiate along the granulocytic lineage.
The GED-determined geometric parameters (r(h1)) are: rSe-S 219.1(1), rS-C 183.2(1), rC-H 109.6(4) pm; angleS-Se-S 102.9(3), angleSe-S-C 100.6(2), angleS-C-H (mean) 107.4(5), phiS-Se-S-C 87.9(20), phiSe-S-C-H 178.8(19) degrees for Se(SCH(3))(2), and rTe-S 238.1(2), rS-C 184.1(3), rC-H 110.0(6) pm; angleS-Te-S 98.9(6), angleTe-S-C 99.7(4), angleS-C-H (mean) 109.2(9), phiS-Te-S-C 73.0(48), phiTe-S-C-H 180.1(19) degrees for Te(SCH(3))(2).
A 63-year-old Caucasian man with renal amyloidosis undergoing peripheral blood stem cell collection for an autologous stem cell transplant developed extensive bilateral upper-extremity deep venous thrombosis (DVT) and pulmonary embolism secondary to heparin-induced thrombocytopenia.
Somatic CSF3R T618I (0/54) and CALR (0/30) mutations were not detected either in aCML or MDS/MPN-U.
Microarray analysis of miRNAs expressed by Gtl2((-/+)) teratomas revealed decreased expression of 28 miRNAs encoded by the Dlk1-Dio3 domain, low expression of embryonic stem cell-specific miRNAs and dysregulation of miRNAs involved in tumorigenesis.
This study suggests that downregulation of ncRNAs in the Dlk1-Dio3 domain leads to enhanced teratoma growth and repression of stem cell markers.
We selected eight genes, ATM serine/threonine kinase gene (ATM), BRCA2, DNA repair associated gene (BRCA2), checkpoint kinase 2 gene (CHEK2), EGFR, parkin RBR E3 ubiquitin protein ligase gene (PARK2), telomerase reverse transcriptase gene (TERT), tumor protein p53 gene (TP53), and Yes associated protein 1 gene (YAP1), on the basis of prior anecdotal association with lung cancer or genome-wide association studies.
Expression level of seven in absentia homolog 2 (SIAH2), an E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase, is upregulated in NSCLC and correlated with tumor grade.
Tumor protein 53 (TP53), TP63, Ki67, epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), minichromosome maintenance complex component 6 (MCM6), MCM7, uncharacterized proteins KIAA1522 and KIAA0317, and ubiquitin-protein ligase UHR1 (ICBP90) frequently presented high expression in bronchial brushing specimens from patients who had lung cancer compared with patients who had benign lung lesions.
Notch1, Dll-1 and Jagged-1 expression were also assessed in stable Kaiso-depleted colon cancer cells and isolated intestinal epithelial cells using real time PCR and western blotting.
To assess Kaiso binding to the DLL1, JAG1 and NOTCH1 promoter regions, chromatin immunoprecipitation was performed on three colon cancer cell lines.
The expressions of Notch1, DLL-1, and p-mTOR were detected in 21 cases of FAP polyps, 20 cases of colorectal inflammatory polyp, and 20 cases of poorly differentiated colorectal cancer by Western blotting and reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).
The protein and mRNA expressions of Notch-1, DLL-1, and p-mTOR in the FAP group were significantly higher than those in colorectal adenoma group; furthermore, they were significantly higher in the colorectal cancer group (all p &lt; 0.05).
Potentially novel GPR81 agonists were identified that suppressed fasting plasma free fatty acid levels in rodents and in addition improved insulin sensitivity in mouse models of insulin resistance and diabetes.
The GPR81 and GPR109A receptors mediate antilipolytic effects and are potential drug targets for the treatment of metabolic disorders such as dyslipidemia and type 2 diabetes.
Similar to GPR109a, the activation of GPR81 by lactate suppresses lipolysis, suggesting that GPR81 may be a potential drug target for treating dyslipidemia.
In addition, the fact that GPR81 is expressed only in adipocytes, whereas GPR109a is expressed in various tissues and cells, including Langerhans cells, which are considered responsible for flushing, indicates that targeting GPR81 could lead to the development of antidyslipidemia agents with a reduced risk of this side effect.
These results suggest that GPR81 is an attractive drug target for treating dyslipidemia without the risk of flushing.
GPR81 expression was decreased in ob/ob mice, an animal model of type 2 diabetes that is characterized by inflammation.
GPR81 may thus be an attractive target for the treatment of dyslipidemia and other metabolic disorders.
Hence, targeting GPR81 may lead to the development of a novel and effective therapy for dyslipidemia and a better side effect profile than nicotinic acid.
As a proxy for selectivity, ELISAs against tetanus toxoid and the natural antigens laminin, thyroglobulin, and single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) were utilized to assess the ability of the identified reagents to inhibit additional antibody responses.
One of these, the anti-hypertensive agent clonidine, displayed only minimal inhibition of antibodies elicited by vaccination against tetanus toxoid or pre-existing natural antibodies against laminin, thyroglobulin, or ssDNA.
We examined the influence of activated platelets on cytokine production by normal human mononuclear cells, induced by tetanus toxoid (TT), human thyroglobulin (TG), Escherichia coli LPS, or intact Porphyromonas gingivalis.
With this aim, adult degu females were immunized with four antigens, including two mollusk hemocyanins from Concholepas and Megathura (CCH and KLH, respectively), porcine thyroglobulin and tetanus toxoid.
Notably, both patient groups and healthy controls exhibited higher proliferative responses to thyroglobulin than to a foreign recall antigen, tetanus toxoid.
In this study, four different types of carrier molecule were investigated: (a) single and branched amino acid polymers--[poly-(D-glu, D-lys) and poly-(phe, glu)-poly(DL-ala)-poly(lys)]; (b) bacterial toxoids--diphtheria (DT) and tetanus (TT); (c) synthetic T-helper epitopes--derived from malarial circumsporozite protein (CS) and measles virus fusion protein (MVF); and (d) thyroglobulin (Thy)--a large protein.
Delayed-type hypersensitivity skin response (DTH); antibody response to hepatitis B, tetanus and diphtheria, and pneumococcal vaccines; and autoantibodies to DNA and thyroglobulin were assessed before and after supplementation.
Here, we compare the expression profile of PTPs in CD4 T cells of healthy volunteers and patients submitted to an early arthritis clinic, due to suspicion of rheumatoid arthritis, an autoimmune disease mediated by CD4 T cells.
In addition, while null mutations of Lmo1 or Lmo3 have no discernible phenotype, null mutation of Lmo4 alone causes perinatal lethality due to a severe neural tube defect which occurs in the form of anencephaly or exencephaly.
Genetic factors including the level of expression of the fingerprint of genes involved in the development of bones and cartilage such as GDF-5 or ESR-Alfa or CALM-1 are known to be strong determinants of the osteoarthritis (OA) in Caucasian and Oriental populations.
To identify the frequency of the rs143383 SNPin the GDF5 gene, which is located in the 5'-untranslated region of Turkish population with knee osteoarthritis (OA).
A functional single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) +104T/C in the 5'-UTR of GDF5 (rs143383) was reported to be associated with osteoarthritis susceptibility in Han Chinese and Japanese populations.
A new study reports molecular characterization of the GDF5 locus, which is associated with osteoarthritis risk and adult height in humans.
Variants in GDF5 are associated with human arthritis and decreased height, but the causal mutations are still unknown.
Our results suggest that an ancient regulatory variant in GROW1 has been repeatedly selected in northern environments and that past selection on growth phenotypes explains the high frequency of a GDF5 haplotype that also increases arthritis susceptibility in many human populations.
The present case-control study was conducted to detect the genetic association between GDF5 (+104T/C) single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) and primary knee osteoarthritis (KOA), as well as the possible association of SNP with the severity of KOA.
The LAZ3/BCL6 (lymphoma-associated zinc finger 3/B cell lymphomas 6) gene frequently is altered in non-Hodgkin lymphomas.
Cross-sectional associations were examined between CVD risk factors and urinary LH, FSH, estrone conjugates, and pregnanediol glucuronide (Pdg) measured across one menstrual cycle or 50 d. Menstruating women (n = 500) who were free from diabetes or past stroke or heart attack enrolled in the Daily Hormone Study-Study of Women's Health across the Nation were studied.
We examined 24-h BP recordings in 434 patients with ischemic stroke (lacunar stroke [LS], n = 205; non-lacunar stroke [NLS], n = 229) and in 178 normotensive subjects.
As the basal activity of the MEK1/2-ERK1/2 pathway is often high in acute myeloid leukemias, and that ATO is known to stimulate MEK1/2-ERK1/2 signaling in leukemia, the authors investigated whether knock down of the downstream effector of ERK1/2, RSK1, could enhance the anti-leukemic activity of ATO.
One showed growth retardation, craniofacial dysmorphism, syndactyly, developmental delay and a de novo deletion (~8.5Mb) on chromosome 7q21.13-q21.3, including DLX5 and DLX6.
In vitro, DeltaNp63alpha induces transcription from the Dlx5 and Dlx6 promoters, an activity abolished by EEC and SHFM-IV mutations, but not by Ankyloblepharon-Ectodermal defects-Cleft lip/palate (AEC) mutations.
Collectively, this study indicates that CT-induced intestinal barrier disruption and subsequent TLR-4-NF-KB-mediated COX-2 expression are involved in the pathogenesis of EL-induced diarrhea and represent promising novel therapeutic targets of cholera.
However, purified V. cholerae LPS preferentially stimulated TLR4, although not as potently as LPS of other Gram-negative bacteria, implying that LPS is not a major immunostimulatory component of KVC.
The anti-HMGB1 monoclonal antibody demonstrated therapeutic potential against albuminuria in lupus nephritis by inhibiting neutrophil recruitment and neutrophil extracellular traps.
Changes in the mean levels of high mobility group box-1 (HMGB-1) protein and superoxide dismutase (SOD), duration of vasopressor therapy, incidence of acute renal failure, and 60 days' mortality were secondary endpoints.
Serum cathepsin L activity positively associated with age, body mass index, nitrite level, neutrophil count, high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hs-CRP), N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide, high-mobility group box-1 protein (HMGB1) and 24-h proteinuria.
The data also showed patients with statin administration present significantly lower cathepsin L activity (P &lt; 0.01), hs-CRP (P &lt; 0.01), HMGB1 (P &lt; 0.01) and proteinuria (P &lt; 0.01) compared to non-statin treatment group.
We confirmed the increased expression of IL-36Alfa in the renal tubular epithelial cells of a mouse model of unilateral ureteral obstruction (UUO) and related cell models using mechanically induced pressure, oxidative stress, or high mobility group box 1.
These findings suggest that serum anti-NCS, anti-GBM and HMGB1 may serve as biomarkers specific for the presence of nephritis in pSLE.
By integrated analysis of our data and publicly available bioinformatics resources, we found that a combination panel consisting of CDH3, PLAU, and LFNG might improve the prognosis of overall pancreatic cancer survival.
Hepatocellular carcinoma etiology had no detectable influence on miR-122 expression, whereas miR-152 was increased in HCV+ tissue samples.
Aberrant expressions of the miR-148/152 family (miR-148a, miR-148b, and miR-152) have been documented in many tumor tissues, including hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
And high expression of HLA-G further suppressed NK against cancer cells, providing a new concept that miR-152 was involved in HBV-induced hepatocellular carcinoma.
The consistency of our findings suggests AKR1C isoenzymes 2 and 3, and potentially SRD5A1, may play a role in progression of HCV-related liver disease in males.
Altogether, our data in this Z-12 cell model suggest that the beneficial effects of treatment with progestin observed in endometriosis patients might arise from decreased pre-receptor metabolism of the protective progesterone by the SRD5A1 and AKR1C enzymes.
The mRNA levels for luteinizing hormone receptor (Lhcgr), scavenger receptor class B member 1 (Scarb1), steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (StAR), cholesterol side chain cleavage enzyme (Cyp11a1), 3Beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 1 (HSD3Beta1), 17Alfa-hydroxylase/20-lyase (Cyp17a1) and membrane receptor c-kit (kit) were significantly downregulated by cerebral ischemia, while luteinizing hormone, Kit ligand (KitL), 17Beta-hydrosteroid dehydrogenase 3 (HSD17Beta3) and 5Alfa-reductase (Srd5a1) were not affected.
Patient 1 with SDCCAG8 homozygous deletions showed no ciliopathy-specific extrarenal manifestations, such as retinitis pigmentosa or polydactyly prior to genetic analysis.
Antipyrine clearance (AP Cl) in CAH patients with fibrosis (0.246 +/- 0.98 mL/min per kg) was similar to that observed in patients with cirrhosis (0.223 +/- 0.148 mL/min per kg), and both values were significantly lower than that found in CAH patients without fibrosis (0.406 +/- 0.159 mL/min per kg, P &lt; 0.01).
Also Ymax was reduced by 50% in cirrhosis, whereas Tmax was increased by 50%, and both significantly correlated with galactose elimination capacity (GEC; R2 = 0.706 and R2 = 0.505, respectively) and with antipyrine clearance (Ap Cl; R2 = 0.823 and R2 = 0.576, respectively).
12 subjects had normal renal and hepatic function (mean creatinine clearance (GFR) 107 +/- 240 ml/min, antipyrine clearance (AP Cl) 47 +/- 10.2 ml/min; x +/- SD), 13 subjects had impaired renal function (mean GFR 38 +/- 11.5 ml/min, AP Cl 39 +/- 4.0 ml/min), and 12 patients had liver cirrhosis which was confirmed by liver biopsy (mean AP Cl 18 +/- 9.2 ml/min, GFR 92 +/- 8.1 ml/min).
The prognostic value of Gal-8 has been described for laryngeal carcinoma as well as advanced colon carcinoma.
The current study analyzed the prognostic values contributed by galectin-1, galectin-3, galectin-4, and galectin-8 in cases of colon carcinoma.
The data from the current study strongly suggest that galectins-1, -3, and -4 may be involved in the early stages of human colon carcinoma development and that galectin-8 is involved in the later stages.
The present study deals with the quantitative determination of immunohistochemical expression of galectin-8 in normal, benign, and malignant human colon tissue samples and in four human colon cancer models (HCT-15, LoVo, CoLo201, and DLD-1) maintained both in vitro as permanent cell lines and in vivo as nude mice xenografts.
The presence of galectin-8 mRNA in the four human colon cancer cell lines was examined by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction.
In vitro, cellular localisation of exogenously added galectin-8 in the culture media of these colon cancer cells was visualised by fluorescence microscopy.
Malignant colon tissue exhibited a significantly lower galectin-8 level than normal or benign tissue colon cancers; those with extensive invasion capacities (T3-4/N+/M+) harboured significantly less galectin-8 than colon cancers with localised invasion capacities (T1-2/N0/M0).
Grafting the four experimental human colon cancer models onto nude mice enabled us to show that the immunohistochemical expression of galectin-8 was inversely related to tumour growth rate.
Our findings indicate that downregulation of Mir30c and subsequent activation of BECN1 promotes autophagy, contributing to the pathogenesis of diabetic cardiomyopathy.
Cinnamomum verum is used to make the spice cinnamon and has been used for more than 5000 years by both of the two most ancient forms of medicine in the words: Ayurveda and traditional Chinese herbal medicines for various applications such as adenopathy, rheumatism, dermatosis, dyspepsia, stroke, tumors, elephantiasis, trichomonas, yeast, and virus infections.
Tissue specific intestinal glucose uptake was measured before and after the treatment period using FDG-PET during euglycemic hyperinsulinemia.
Because previous literature showed that via hyperglycemia and hyperinsulinemia glucagon has the effect of increasing FDG uptake in skeletal muscle, the use of glucagon should be avoided just prior to FDG PET, although in our subjects, no statistical proof that glucagon enhances FDG uptake in skeletal muscle was obtained.
The group of pigs in a fasting state and the group of pigs with euglycemic supraphysiological hyperinsulinemia were scanned by positron emission tomography after a single dose of [(18)F]FDG tracer.
We measured regional brain glucose uptake in morbidly obese (n = 19) and normal weighted (n = 16) subjects with 2-[18F]fluoro-2-deoxyglucose ([18F]FDG) positron emission tomography (PET) during euglycemic hyperinsulinemia and with functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) while anticipatory food reward was induced by repeated presentations of appetizing and bland food pictures.
We present a model of diet-induced hyperinsulinemia associated with increased insulin receptor activation in neoplastic tissue and with increased tumor FDG-PET image intensity.
Fractional extraction of [(18)F]FDG and [(2)H]G was similar (not significant), intercorrelated (r = 0.98, P &lt; .0001), and equally higher during hyperinsulinemia than fasting (P &lt;or= .05), with an LC of 0.98 +/- 0.10 and 1.18 +/- 0.26, respectively.
Fourteen pigs were coinjected with (18)F-FDG and 6,6-(2)H-glucose ((2)H-G) during fasting (n = 6) and during physiologic (1.0 mU.kg(-1).min(-1), n = 4) and supraphysiologic (5.0 mU.kg(-1).min(-1), n = 4) euglycemic hyperinsulinemia.
IGM (Idiopathic Granulomatous Mastitis) is a rare, chronic, non-malignant and non-life-threatening breast disease.
Seven-eight patients with non-lactational mastitis treated in our hospital between September 2013 and May 2015 and 88 healthy women (control) were examined for peripheral blood levels of antinuclear antibody (ANA), anti-histone antibody (AHA), immunoglobulins (IgA, IgM, and IgG) and complements (C3, C4, and total complements).
Seventy three patients had idiopathic granulomatous lobular mastitis and 20 patients had specific granulomatous mastitis IGM (18 tuberculosis mastitis, 1 alveolar echinococcosis and 1 silk reaction).
Lung tissue samples obtained from 27 patients with IIP and 39 patients with CVD-ILD were detected using monoclonal antibodies against CD1a, CD1c, CD83, Langerin and DC-specific intercellular adhesion molecule-3-grabbing nonintegrin (DC-SIGN).
Finally, a potential role for ApoA-I in microvascular occlusion associated with thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura and sepsis was revealed by the inverse relationship between the concentration of ApoA-I and that of hyperadhesive VWF.
The objective of the study was to evaluate anti-apolipoprotein A-I (Apo A-I) and carotid intima-media thickness (cIMT) as cardiovascular risk factors in Egyptian women with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).
Ten of sixteen variants previously associated with iron traits generalized to HCHS/SOL, including variants at the transferrin (TF), hemochromatosis (HFE), fatty acid desaturase 2 (FADS2)/myelin regulatory factor (MYRF), transmembrane protease, serine 6 (TMPRSS6), transferrin receptor (TFR2), N-acetyltransferase 2 (arylamine N-acetyltransferase) (NAT2), ABO blood group (ABO), and GRB2 associated binding protein 3 (GAB3) loci.
In the liver, TFR2 forms a complex with HFE, a hereditary hemochromatosis-associated protein, and acts as an iron sensor.
Mutations in VCP are associated with two neurodegenerative diseases, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and inclusion body myopathy with Paget's disease of the bone and frontotemporal dementia (IBMPFD), and extensive study has revealed crucial functions of VCP within neurons.
Here, we analyzed a cohort of German patients with sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal lobar degeneration comorbidity (ALS/FTD) for VCP and WASH complex gene mutations.
Multisystem proteinopathy (MSP), a newly proposed syndrome including inclusion body myopathy (IBM), PDB, frontotemporal dementia (FTD), and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), is mainly caused by mutation in VCP gene.
Mutations in the gene encoding valosin-containing protein (VCP) lead to multisystem proteinopathies including frontotemporal dementia.
The production of mature pRNA is essential since it guides the repressor TIP5 to rRNA genes, and IGS-rRNA abolishes this process.
Remarkably, ESCs depleted of DHX9 are unable to differentiate and this phenotype is reverted by the addition of pRNA, whereas providing IGS-rRNA and pRNA mutants deficient for TIP5 binding are not sufficient.
This study was to investigate the relationships of genetic variants in TLR2 and TLR3 with hepatitis B virus (HBV) natural clearance and HBV-related hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) risk in a Chinese male population.
The study aimed to investigate mRNA expression levels of TLR2 and TLR3 in Hepatitis B virus (HBV) mediated chronic hepatitis B (CHB), cirrhosis (CIRR), and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), and to correlate viral load with severity of these diseases and expression of TLRs.
Indeed, exogenous histones promote both hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cell migration and invasion through toll-like receptor (TLR)4, but not TLR2 or the receptor for advanced glycosylation end product.
Multiple TLRs such as TLR2, TLR3, TLR4, and TLR9, as well as other receptors, can be expressed in cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma.
To explore the relationship between innate immunity and hepatitis C Virus (HCV) in determining the risk of cirrhosis (CIR), hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), mixed cryoglobulinemia syndrome (MCS) and non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL), we investigated the impact of the toll-like receptor-2 (TLR2) and interleukin-28B (IL28B) genetic variants.
The present study was conducted to investigate the expression of COX-2 and IL-32 in primary gastric B-cell lymphoma in order to define their clinical significance and their association with Helicobacter pylori (Hp) infection.
COX-2 and IL-32 protein expression was detected in 31 primary gastric B-cell lymphoma patients and 19 chronic gastritis patients with immunohistochemistry.
These results suggested that Hp infection and the expression of COX-2 and IL-32 were closely linked with each other, and that the overexpression of COX-2 and IL-32 was correlated with tumor progression in primary gastric B-cell lymphoma, thus indicating potential novel therapeutic target.
Using skin samples from patients with mycosis fungoides (n = 21), healthy volunteers (n = 17), and individuals with atopic dermatitis (n = 17) and psoriasis (n = 9), we found IL32 mRNA expression significantly higher in mycosis fungoides samples than in samples from benign inflammatory skin diseases, and its expression increases with disease progression.
By IHC and immunofluorescence, we confirmed IL32 protein expression in many CD3(+)CD4(+) T cells and some epidermotropic T cells in mycosis fungoides lesions.
MyLa cells (a mycosis fungoides cell line) express IL32, which, in turn, could promote cellular proliferation and viability in a dose-dependent fashion.
Of the major "polarizing" T-cell cytokines, only IFNGamma mRNA increases with mycosis fungoides progression and positively correlates with IL32 mRNA expression.
Th2 cytokines do not positively correlate with IL32 mRNA expression or mycosis fungoides progression.
In conclusion, we have identified IL32(+) cells as the likely tumor cells in mycosis fungoides, and demonstrated that IL32 mRNA expression increases with mycosis fungoides progression and is significantly higher than mRNA expression in other skin diseases, and that some IL32(+) T cells are independent from the defined Th subsets.
Thus, IL32 may play a unique role in mycosis fungoides progression as an autocrine cytokine.
In this study, we examined the role of IL-32 in cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL), including mycosis fungoides (MF) and Sezary syndrome (SS).
Microarray analysis showed nonstatistical twofold downregulation of collagen-coding genes (COL4A4, COL8A2, and COL21A1) and a twofold upregulation of the COL6A1, laminin Alfa3 gene LAMA3, and integrin subunit Alfa10 gene ITGA10 in FECD cells.
To investigate whether the tag single nucleotide polymorphisms (tSNPs) in VSX1, COL4A3, COL4A4, IL1A and IL1B genes were associated with keratoconus (KTCN) in the Han Chinese population.
Therefore, a novel liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry assay demonstrated that nitration of the STAT1-Tyr701 occurs in PBMC derived from both pancreatic cancer and melanoma patients.
JAK-STAT inhibitor Ruxolitinib selectively inhibits STAT1 and STAT3 activation and increases CTL infiltration to induce a Tc1/Th1 immune response in the tumor microenvironment in an orthotopic pancreatic cancer mouse model.
Bazedoxifene also inhibited STAT3 phosphorylation induced by IL6 and IL11, but not by OSM or STAT1 phosphorylation induced by INFGamma in pancreatic cancer cells, suggesting that Bazedoxifene inhibits the GP130/STAT3 pathway mediated by IL6 and IL11.
In response to cetuximab-coated pancreatic tumor cells, IL-21-treated NK cells secreted significantly higher levels of IFN-Gamma and chemokines, increased chemotaxis of T cells, and enhanced NK cell signal transduction via activation of ERK and STAT1.
All patients underwent standardised cycloplegia measurements first by the Pediatric Autorefractor plusoptiX A 08 in 1 metre working distance, then adding an infrared filter to reduce interferences, followed by the Retinomax K-plus 3 in 5 cm working distance and retinoscopy as reference on the right eye.
To characterise the presence of a hyperautofluorescent (HAF) ring associated with choroidal neovascularisation (CNV) complex in patients with wet age-related macular degeneration (AMD).
In contrast, the role of other plasma enzymes such as kallikrein-kinin-bradykinin, the Hageman factor, peptides and coagulation proteins in drusen formation and ARMD has yet to be determined.
Lamin B2 knockdown upregulates nucleolar specific 45S rRNA and upstream intergenic transcripts (IGS).
Approximately seven hundred 45S rRNA genes (rDNA) in the Arabidopsis thaliana genome are organised in two 4 Mbp-long arrays of tandem repeats arranged in head-to-tail fashion separated by an intergenic spacer (IGS).
Intergenic spacer (IGS) in the length of 2670 bp in which transcription of 45s rRNA precursor starts was found to contain three distinct AT-rich (A + T &gt; 75%) regions.
In the present study, gingival overgrowth was investigated in transplant patients receiving cyclosporin A (cyclosporin A group) and compared with gingival tissues never exposed to the drug (control group) by analyzing the gene expression of the cell-surface heparan sulfate proteoglycans syndecan-2, syndecan-4 and betaglycan.
In this study, we analyzed the expression of ICAM-1, VCAM-1, E-selectin and annexin V in primary cultures of human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) in response to 10% (v/v) serum of control patients (n = 6), patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and no APS (n = 4) or APS patients (n = 9) for 24 h. Total RNA was prepared from confluent endothelial cell layers and mRNA expression of ICAM-1, VCAM-1 and E-selectin was analyzed by reverse transcription polymerase-chain reaction (RT-PCR).
Chronic pancreatitis was the most common cause of BBS (35%) and cholecystectomy was the most common cause of leaks.
Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS; MIM 209900) is a recessive heterogeneous ciliopathy characterized by retinitis pigmentosa (RP), postaxial polydactyly, obesity, hypogonadism, cognitive impairment and kidney dysfunction.
Whole-exome sequencing was performed in a consanguineous family in which two affected children presented typical BBS features (retinitis pigmentosa, postaxial polydactyly, obesity, hypogonadism and cognitive impairment) without any mutation identified in known BBS genes at the time of the study.
Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by central obesity, mental impairment, rod-cone dystrophy, polydactyly, hypogonadism in males, and renal abnormalities.
BBS was a significant risk factor for post-ERCP pancreatitis and cholangitis based on a multivariate analysis (OR, 10.732; P=0.0022; OR, 6.443; P=0.0260).
When a breakdown by etiology of stricture was performed, 14 of 15 (93.3%) patients with chronic pancreatitis, 17 of 19 (89.5%) with gall stone-related disease, 4 of 4 (100%) with surgical procedures, and 2 of 2 (100%) with BBSs of other etiology had resolution at FCSEMS removal.
The majority of recent studies of benign biliary strictures (BBSs) have reported on treatment of stenotic injuries following cholecystectomy, orthotopic liver transplantation, living donor liver transplantation, chronic pancreatitis, and different inflammatory conditions such as common bile-duct-related strictures.
Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS, OMIM 209900) is a rare genetic disorder characterized by obesity, retinitis pigmentosa, post axial polydactyly, cognitive impairment, renal anomalies and hypogonadism.
GP 78668A (GP-78) infected BALB/c mouse model of encephalitis and gel zymography was performed for MMP-2 and MMP-9 activities.
Aging studies in the senescence-accelerated mouse strain (SAM) prone/8 (SAMP8), an animal model of Alzheimer's disease (AD), revealed significantly decreased mRNA and protein expression of AMF and AMFR in the hippocampus.
It also had a full blown clinical picture of neonatal tetanus including: masseter spasm; generalized rigidity; a high pitched cry: and intermittent opisthotonos posturing.
The aim of this study was to investigate the expression of some main components of Wnt/Beta-catenin signaling including WNT7a, DKK-1, Beta-catenin, and GSK-3Beta in eutopic endometrium and peritoneal endometriotic lesions of endometriosis patients compared to healthy endometrium in the mid-secretory phase of menstrual cycle.
We also demonstrated that the expression of non-phosphorylated Beta-catenin (active form) and phosphorylated GSK-3Beta (inactive form) were up-regulated in endometriosis patients.
The mRNA levels of Beta-catenin, GSK-3Beta, and WNT7a, as well as the protein levels of total Beta-catenin, total GSK-3Beta, and WNT7a in endometriosis group, were not significantly different with those in control group.
It seems that the aberrant activation of Wnt/Beta-catenin signaling in the secretory phase of the menstrual cycle in endometriosis has two essential elements: excessive inactivation of GSK-3Beta and suppression of the expression of Wnt signaling inhibitor DKK-1.
Down-regulation of E-cadherin expression may activate the Wnt/Beta-catenin pathway in endometrial cells, which may together participate in the occurrence of endometriosis.
Additionally, genetic mutations including PTEN, PIK3CA, ARID1A, Wnt/Beta-catenin, microsatellite instability, Src, and KRAS have been shown to be critical in the pathogenesis of endometriosis associated ovarian cancers.
The present study investigated the role of S100A6 in endometriosis and its interaction with Beta-catenin by transfecting eutopic endometrial stromal cells with a recombinant lentivirus containing S100A6-specific small interfering RNA.
When the cAMP-PDIE inhibitor 1-methyl-3-isobutyl xanthine (MIX) was added to the above incubation, VP caused a significant increase in cAMP levels in MCT from both NDI mice and control mice.
Under the present experimental setting, VP and other stimulating factors (MIX, cholera toxin) did not change cAMP levels in MAL from either control mice or from NDI mice.
Even when the cAMP response to AVP is partly corrected by cAMP-PDIE inhibitor 1-methyl-3-isobutylxanthine (MIX), under all tested conditions the cAMP levels in MCT of NDI mice remained much lower than in controls (B.
In the presence of 1 microM AVP and 0.05 mM MIX, the cAMP levels accumulated in MCT of NDI mice were four times lower compared with controls, but the levels of ATP and NAD were not different.
In turn in the pylorus we have observed 15.91% +/- 0.58% nNOS containing neurons in control animals and 35.38% +/- 1.54% in the diabetes group (increase by 122.37%).
To determine the effects of supervised structured aerobic exercise training (SSAET) program on interleukin-6 (IL-6), nitric oxide synthase 1 (NOS-1), and cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) in type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM).
The pathogenesis of diabetes-associated motility disorders are multifactorial and attributed to abnormalities in extrinsic and intrinsic innervation, and a decrease in the number of interstitial cells of Cajal, and nNOS expression and activity.
Differentially methylated genes were enriched in several neuroendocrine signaling pathways including dopamine-DARPP32 feedback (appetite, reward pathways), corticotrophin releasing hormone signaling, nNOS, neuregulin signaling, mTOR signaling, and type II diabetes mellitus signaling.
Altogether, our data support the hypothesis that a dysregulation in the NO production in brain areas as AMY, HIP and dlPAG may contribute to the mechanisms that link anxiety and diabetes, and the prevention of nNOS brain expression changes induced by a prolonged treatment with FO may be an important mechanism related to its anxiolytic-like effect.
The aim of this study was to determine the effect of melatonin on brain apoptosis, oxidative stress, and CD200 molecule in mice and neuroblastoma cultures infected by Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus.
In addition, infected neuroblastoma cell cultures (multiplicity of infection [MOI]: 1) were treated with 0, 0.1, 0.5, and 1 mM of melatonin and analyzed at 2, 4, and 6 h. CD200 and apoptosis expressions were analyzed by immunohistochemistry and TUNEL assay, respectively.
A number of pathogens have been found to modulate the CD200-CD200R pathway during infection, including human herpesvirus 8 (HHV-8), the causative agent of Kaposi's sarcoma and B cell neoplasms in AIDS patients, and a closely related primate virus, rhesus macaque rhadinovirus (RRV), which infects and induces disease in rhesus macaque monkeys.
Through the study of the viral OX2 (vOX2) immunoregulator encoded by Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV), we have identified a T cell-attenuating role both for this protein and for CD200, a cellular orthologue of the viral vOX2 protein.
CD200 protein was expressed on the surface of 5/8 ovarian cancer, 2/4 melanoma, 2/2 neuroblastoma and 2/3 renal carcinoma cell lines tested, but CD200 was absent on prostate, lung, breast, astrocytoma, or glioblastoma cell lines.
Within hPIV4 cases, distributions of diseases were; pneumonia (21 %, 95 % CI 17.1-25.7), bronchiolitis (18 %, 95 % CI 14.3-22.5), croup (2 %, 95 % CI 0.8-3.9), mixed illness of any of pneumonia, bronchiolitis or croup (4 %, 95 % CI 2.5-7.0) or other respiratory diseases (54 %, 95 % CI 49.1-59.6).
Of these, 43 (37.4 %) hospitalized patients [26 males (60.5 %, 95 % CI 45.9 %-75.1 %) and 17 females (39.5 %, 95 % CI 24.9 %-54.1 %)] with mean age of 66.2 +/- 13.4 years had pneumonia triggered by S. marcescens, while 20 (17.4 %) patients [14 males (70 %, 95 % CI 49.9 %-90.1 %) and 6 females (30 %, 95 % CI 9.9 %-50.1 %)] with a mean age of 64.6 +/- 12.8 years had pneumonia caused by P. mirabilis.
Moreover, HBD3-C15 showed antimicrobial activity by inhibiting biofilm formation by S. mutans and other dentinophilic bacteria such as Enterococcus faecalis and Streptococcus gordonii, which are associated with dental caries and endodontic infection, on human dentin slices.
Therefore, we suggest that HBD3-C15 is a potential alternative or additive disinfectant that can be used for the treatment of oral infectious diseases, including dental caries and endodontic infections.
HBD-3 may potentially be applied in the treatment of periodontitis and may function as osteogenic promoter via its anti-inflammatory effect.
The present study assessed the effects of hBD3 as a monotherapy for periodontitis in mice and explored its potential mechanism.
In vivo, hBD3 inhibited the levels of tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-Alfa, interleukin-6, and matrix metalloprotease-9 in periodontium exposed to Porphyromonas gingivalis (P.g) in a mouse periodontitis model; reduced osteoclast formation and lower alveolar bone loss were also observed.
In conclusion, hBD3 exhibits potent anti-periodontitis properties both in vitro and in vivo, and this effect may be correlated to inhibition of the nuclear factor-KB pathway and macrophage polarization.
The expression of epithelium- and neutrophil-derived host defense peptides (HDPs) (LL-37 and human Beta-defensin-3), which activate mast cells via Mas-related G protein-coupled receptor X2 (MRGPRX2), is increased in periodontitis.
The lentiviral vector containing HBD-3 resulted in broad-spectrum antimicrobial activity against a variety of oral organisms, and could potentially be applied in the treatment of oral infectious diseases, including periodontitis.
In mice infected with the A/E pathogen Citrobacter rodentium, co-infection with Giardia muris significantly attenuated weight loss, macro- and microscopic signs of colitis, bacterial colonization and translocation, while concurrently enhancing the production and secretion of antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) mouse Beta-defensin 3 and trefoil factor 3 (TFF3).
Our results indicate that vitamin D specifically enhances the production of the human-Beta-defensin 3 antimicrobial peptide and exerts an inhibitory effect on the pro-inflammatory cytokines, thus suggesting that vitamin D may offer possible therapeutic applications for periodontitis.
When the ARTEMIS scale, which is specific to peripheral arterial occlusive disease, was developed in 1993, there were 400 scales in existence.
The ARTEMIS questionnaire was validated in 177 patients with intermittent claudication (phases IIa and IIb of the Leriche and Fontaine classification).
The objective of this study was to investigate if there is a correlation between the levels of PIMs in disc material and myelopathy associated with cervical intervertebral disc herniation and spondylosis.
However, the possible relationship between PIMs and myelopathy related to cervical disc herniation and spondylosis has not been investigated before.
This study has demonstrated that PIMs are involved in cervical intervertebral disc degeneration with higher concentrations in the samples associated with myelopathy.
The main aetiologies of acute myelopathy (AM) are: multiple sclerosis, systemic disease (SD), spinal cord infarct (SCI), parainfectious myelopathy (PIM) and delayed radiation myelopathy (DRM).
Our findings indicate that parainfectious myelitis (PIM) selectively involving conus medullaris is an important cause of unexplained acute or sub-acute urinary symptoms in adolescent and adult patients.
The WNT6 rs6747776 homozygous minor allele (CC) was associated with increased risk of colorectal adenoma (OR = 2.75, 95% CI: 1.03-7.31).
The incidence of leukemia in these mice varied from 5% to 50%, dependent on the Cre-driving promoter (Cd19, Mb1, or Mx1) used to induce E2A-PBX1 expression.
Mutation in FOXN1 was reported to cause a rare disorder characterized by rudimentary thymus gland, T-cell immunodeficiency, congenital alopecia and nail dystrophy within an Italian community.
Alterations in the transcription factor FOXN1 gene, expressed in the mature thymic and skin epithelia, are responsible for human and murine athymia and prevent the development of the T-cell compartment associated to ectodermal abnormalities such as alopecia and nail dystrophy.
Investigation of a patient with a rare homozygous FOXN1 mutation (R255X), leading to alopecia universalis and thymus aplasia, unexpectedly revealed non-maternal circulating T-cells, and, strikingly, large numbers of aberrant double-negative AlfaBeta T-cells (CD4negCD8neg, DN) and regulatory-like T-cells.
We show that the alopecia exhibited by both the Hoxc13(tm1Mrc) and Foxn1(nu) mice is because of strikingly similar defects in hair shaft differentiation and that both mutants suffer from a severe nail dystrophy.
FOXN1 deficiency is a primary immunodeficiency characterized by athymia, alopecia totalis, and nail dystrophy.
In this study, we examined the time course changes in the blood levels of HMGB1, C-reactive protein (CRP), procalcitonin (PCT) and serum amyloid A (SAA) in patients with secondary peritonitis who developed SIRS or sepsis.
Serum levels of HMGB1, CRP, PCT, and SAA were determined on admission in all the patients, and monitored daily in patients with peritonitis until discharge from hospital.
Preoperative HMGB1, CRP, PCT and SAA levels were statistically highly significantly increased in patients with peritonitis compared to patients with inguinal hernia, and significantly higher in patients with sepsis compared to those with SIRS.
HMGB1 and SAA temporal patterns might be useful in distinguishing sepsis from noninfectious SIRS in secondary peritonitis.
U ovoj studiji smo ispitivali promenu nivoa u krvi HMGB1, Creaktivnog proteina (CRP), prokalcitonina (PCT) i serumskog proteina amiloid A (SAA) kroz vreme kod pacijenata sa sekundarnim peritonitisom koji su razvili SIRS ili sepsu.
Svim pacijentima su odreaivane vrednosti HMGB1, CRP, PCT, SAA u serumu na prijemu u bolnicu, dok je u grupi sa peritonitisom nastavljeno postoperativno merenje ovih parametara svakog dana do otpusta iz bolnice.
Preoperativne vrednosti HMGB1, CRP, PCT, SAA bile su statisticki znacajno vise kod pacijenata sa peritonitisom u odnosu na pacijente sa ingvinalnim kilama, i statisticki znacajno vise kod pacijenata sa sepsom u odnosu na one sa SIRS-om.
Vremenski obrasci nivoa HMGB1 i SAA mogli bi da budu korisni u razlikovanju sepse i SIRS-a bez infekcije u sekundarnom peritonitisu.
Using a murine model of polymicrobial septic peritonitis, we demonstrated that treatment with anti-HMGB1 Ab significantly diminished sepsis-induced dysfunction of neutrophil NADPH oxidase activity.
The aim of our study was to test high mobility group box 1 (HMGB1) in PD patients, evaluating its role as precocious marker of peritoneum damage during peritonitis.
In patients with acute peritonitis, the highest serum and peritoneal HMGB1 values (64 +/- 3.6 and 70 +/- 5.3 ng/mL, respectively) were assessed, with a progressive decrease of their levels at the resolution time (T-end: sHMGB1:36 +/- 2.5; pHMGB1:30.5 +/- 7.0 ng/mL).
However, the potential role and source of HMGB1 in the peritoneal dialysis (PD) effluence of patients with peritonitis are unknown.
By animal model, inhibition of HMGB1 with glycyrrhizin was performed to determine the effects of HMGB1 in LPS-induced mice peritonitis.
The results showed that the levels of HMGB1 in PDE were higher in patients with peritonitis than those in controls, and gradually declined during the period of effective antibiotic treatments.
Our study demonstrates that elevated HMGB1 levels in PDE during PD-related peritonitis, at least partially, from peritoneal mesothelial cells, which may be involved in the process of PD-related peritonitis and play a critical role in acute peritoneal dysfunction.
We investigated lncRNAs with stimulus specific immunomodulatory activity as potential marker genes: LINC00595, SBF2-AS1 (A.fumigatus) and RP11-588G21.2, RP11-394l13.1 (C.albicans) might be detectable in the early phase of infection and serve as therapeutic targets in the future.
It included three steroid-treated adult asthma groups (severe nonsmokers (SAn group), severe current/ex-smokers (SAs/ex group) and those with mild-moderate disease (MMA group)) and healthy controls (HC group).
Immunohistochemical analysis of glycol methacrylate resin-embedded biopsies showed there were more mast cells in submucosa of the HC group (33.6 mm-2) compared with both severe asthma groups (SAn: 17.4 mm-2, p&lt;0.001; SAs/ex: 22.2 mm-2, p=0.01) and with the MMA group (21.2 mm-2, p=0.01).
In 66 adults asthma was categorized as steroid-naive (SN, n = 17), mild to moderate (MMA, n = 33), and refractory treated with oral corticosteroids (RA, n = 16).
To examine the relationship between the HEDIS Medication Management for people with Asthma (MMA) measure and asthma outcomes.
The association between MMA compliance in 2012 and asthma outcomes in 2013 was determined.
Patients who were 75% or 50% MMA compliant in 2012 showed no clinically meaningful difference in asthma-related hospitalizations, emergency department visits, or rescue inhaler dispensing in 2013 compared with those who were noncompliant.
Stepwise comparison of patients who were 75% or more, 50% to 74%, and less than 50% MMA compliant showed no meaningful difference in asthma outcomes between groups.
Compliance with the HEDIS MMA measure is not related to improvement in the asthma outcomes assessed (rescue inhaler dispensing, asthma-coded hospitalizations, or asthma-coded emergency department visits).
neutrophils were the main cell lineage of IL-1Beta to take part in the innate anti-fungi immunity in the cornea; IL-1Beta generation induced by fungal infection might not be through the pre-excitation in the classical signal pathway; TLR4/TRIF pathway was not involved in pro-IL-1Beta generation; while Dectin-1/syk pathway was involved in IL-1Beta generation in the fungal keratitis; Caspase-l participated in the modification of IL-1Beta to change from the precursor into the mature body; but NLRP3 inflammasome and ASC inflammasome were not involved in IL-1Beta generation; Caspase-11 was involved in IL-1Beta generation through regulating the modified process of Caspase-l to turning from precursor into mature body.
To explore the relationship between LOX-1 and TLR4 in Aspergillus fumigatus (A. fumigatus) keratitis.
To determine LOX-1 and TLR4 can affect each other and regulate inflammation through regulation of the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in A. fumigatus keratitis.
LOX-1 and TLR4 can affect each other and regulate the generation of ROS in A. fumigatus keratitis.
Purpose: To develop a qPCR method to examine the 202 isoform of excision repair cross-complementation group 1 (ERCC1_202) and to evaluate its clinical utility as a predictive biomarker for platinum-based chemotherapy in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
Results: A strong correlation was observed between ERCC1_202 mRNA and ERCC1 mRNA levels in NSCLC cells (P &lt; 0.001).
The present study aimed to investigate the effects of excision repair cross-complementation 1 (ERCC1) expression on the prognosis of patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
Multivariate analysis demonstrated that ERCC1 expression, pathological staging, and tumor staging were important prognostic factors for NSCLC.
The results of the present study suggest that ERCC1 expression is an important prognostic indicator for NSCLC, particularly for patients with stage II-III tumors who receive systematic platinum-based adjuvant chemotherapy.
A SNP of the ERCC1 gene (T19007C) has been reported as a prognostic marker in platinum-treated non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
The endonuclease ERCC1-XPF has an important role in the repair of DNA damage caused by a variety of chemotherapeutic agents and there has been intense interest in the use of ERCC1 as a predictive marker of therapeutic response in non-small cell lung carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma and ovarian cancer.
The study demonstrated poor methodological quality of SRs/meta-analysis assessing the predictive value of ERCC1 in chemotherapy among the NSCLC patients, especially the high performance bias.
The expression of ERCC1 and TUBB3 proteins was also evaluated in 50 patients who underwent curative resection for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
ERCC1 was expressed in 21 cases (42%), while TUBB3 was expressed in 27 cases (54%), among the 50 NSCLC patients evaluated in the present study.
The expression of ERCC1 and TUBB3 proteins in the thymic carcinoma cases was lower than that in the NSCLC cases.
The pairwise meta-analysis indicated that in terms of overall response ratio (ORR), ERCC1 (rs11615), XRCC1 (rs25487, rs1799782), and XPD (rs13181) polymorphisms are associated with the efficacy of platinum-based chemotherapy in NSCLC.
ERCC1(rs11615), XRCC1(rs25487, rs1799782) and XPD(rs13181) polymorphisms were better predictors in evaluating the efficacy of platinum-based chemotherapy in NSCLC patients.
KRAS mutations have been found in duodenal adenocarcinomas and may have prognostic significance.
The purpose of this study was to classify clinicopathological characteristics, microsatellite instability and KRAS mutations and identify possible prognostic role of KRAS mutations in duodenal adenocarcinomas.
In conclusion, KRAS G&gt;A mutation correlates significantly with late stage and poor tumor differentiation in duodenal adenocarcinoma.
Among patients who undergo a curative resection of duodenal adenocarcinoma, KRAS G&gt;A mutation carriers will more likely experience distant relapse but may not exhibit a poor prognosis.
The purpose was to identify possible subsets of duodenal adenocarcinomas based on microsatellite instability (MSI), DNA methylation, mutations in the KRAS and BRAF genes, clinicopathologic features, and prognosis.
CIMP(+) was detected in 27 of 99 (27.3%) duodenal adenocarcinomas and was associated with MSI (P = 0.011) and MLH1 methylation (P &lt; 0.001), but not with KRAS mutations (P = 0.114), as compared with CIMP(-) tumors.
Each small intestine K-ras mutation was found in a duodenal adenocarcinoma (4 of 12 cases, 33%), whereas none occurred in 16 other jejunal or ileal adenocarcinomas.
K-ras mutations appear to play a significant role in the pathogenesis of duodenal adenocarcinomas, but they do not appear to be important in the development of jejunal or ileal adenocarcinomas or of carcinoid tumors of the small intestine.
The qRT-PCR showed that miR-5703 and miR-1246 expression was significantly higher in ovarian cancer cells than in normal control cells, whereas the miR-424-5p level was significantly lower.
Decreased expression of miR-424-5p in ovarian carcinoma might be a putative biomarker for distant metastasis in ovarian carcinoma.
Our studies show that miR-424 levels are suppressed in cell lines that stably maintain HPV 31 or 16 episomes as well as cervical cancer lines that contain integrated genomes such as SiHa.
miRNA expression profiles demonstrate that miR-424 was markedly downregulated in cervical cancer tissue.
Finally, lowered expression of miR-424 could recover the tumor-suppressive effects of PVT1 knockdown in cervical cancer cell lines.
Our results reveal a tumor-promoting role for PVT1, acting as a competing endogenous RNA (ceRNA) or a molecular sponge in negatively modulating miR-424, which might provide a novel therapeutic target for cervical cancer.
Here, we investigated the role of DCLK1 and microRNA-424 (miR-424) in ovarian clear cell carcinoma (OCCC), a histopathologically distinct subtype of epithelial ovarian cancer associated with poor prognosis and chemotherapy resistance.
Analysis of samples from 30 OCCC patients showed that DCLK1 was upregulated and miR-424 was downregulated in tumors compared with adjacent non-tumor tissues.
Taken together, these data demonstrate that miR-424 has the capacity to suppress cell invasion and EMT in OCCC by downregulating DCLK1, suggesting potential therapeutic targets and strategies for the treatment of this disease.
This research aimed to investigate the function and underlying mechanisms of miR424-5p in cervical cancer cell growth.
After transfection with miR424-5p mimics or inhibitor, cervical cancer cell proliferation and apoptosis were evaluated by WST-1 and flow cytometry assay, respectively.
Expression of miR424-5p was notably decreased in cervical cancer tissues and cells.
This research suggests that miR424-5p may act as a novel anti-oncogene in cervical cancer by blocking cell growth through targeting KDM5B-Notch pathway.
Here, we identified significantly decreased miR-424 expression in radioresistant cervical cancer cells and specimens from cervical cancer patients with radioresistance compared to their radiosensitive parental cells and specimens from radiosensitive patients, respectively.
Ectopic expression of miR-424 significantly increased radiation-induced DNA damage, cell apoptosis and G2/M cell cycle arrest in radioresistant cervical cancer cells.
Notably, miR-424 agomiR treatment can sensitize radioresistant cervical cancer cells to radiation in a xenograft model.
Taken together, these findings suggest that miR-424 acts as a radiosensitizing miRNA and reveal a new therapeutic strategy for radioresistant cervical cancers.
When comparing cytogenetic effects of encephalitis shows: the young patients tick-borne encephalitis level by routine cytogenetics abnormal cells was significantly higher in carriers of inactive forms of gene GSTM1 (0)/GSTT1 (0) than containing active homozygous variants of these genes.
Individuals with GSTT1-null and GSTM1-null genotypes showed higher risk of hepatotoxicity with advanced stage of (CD4&lt;200) of HIV infection (P=0.18, OR=1.39; P=0.63, OR=1.13).
We analysed the distribution of GSTM1 and GSTT1 gene polymorphisms in Egyptian patients with chronic hepatitis C, and investigated their relationship to the clinical outcome of chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection.
To study the relationship between glutathione S-transferase genes GSTT1 and GSTM1 polymorphisms and the susceptibility to infectious mononucleosis (IM) and acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL) in children.
To investigate the effects of GSTT1, GSTM1 and GSTP1 gene polymorphism on the stage of hepatitis B infection.
The study included normal fetuses and fetuses with syndromes associated with known mandible pathology: Pierre Robin sequence or complex (n = 8); hemifacial microsomia (Treacher-Collins syndrome, n = 3); postaxial acrofacial dysostosis (n = 1).
Hyperglycemia (HG) exacerbates myocardial ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) injury and renders protective strategies ineffective by amplified inflammatory response via enhanced high-mobility group box-1 (HMGB1) release.
In this review, we look at the mechanisms of secretion of HMGB1, the role of receptors, MMP enzymes, hypoglycaemia, atherosclerosis, oedema, angiogenesis as well as neuroimmunological reactions and post ischemic brain recovery in IS.
In the present study, we examined whether alleviation of diabetes-attendant oxidative stress and ensuing change in HMGB1 expression influence the dynamic equilibrium between apoptosis/autophagy and liver damage.
Since reduced HMGB1 binds to RAGE but not to TLR4, redox modification of HMGB1 as a mechanism regulating the cross-talk between apoptosis and autophagy in diabetes is discussed.
We evaluated the role of GSTM1 polymorphisms in modifying the association between indoor pesticide exposure and cutaneous melanoma.
After adjustment for sex, age, education, hair colour, skin photo-type, solar lentigines, number of nevi and sunburns episodes in childhood, a 2.76-fold (95% CI: 1.08-7.08) increase in the risk of cutaneous melanoma was observed for GSTM1 null individuals highly exposed to indoor pesticides (&gt;=2 times/year) in comparison with GSTM1 active individuals who received low exposure (&lt;2 times/year).
Participants exposed to these products for 10 years or more and with GSTM1 null genotype also had an increased risk of cutaneous melanoma (odds ratio: 2.78; 95% CI: 1.01-7.66) in comparison with participants with a low duration of exposure (&lt;10 years) and active GSTM1.
These findings suggest that the GSTM1 null genotype is a risk modifier for cutaneous melanoma.
EPHX1 Tyr113His, XPD C156A, and GSTT1 null genotypes were associated with skin cancer risk (OR = 2.99, 95% CI = 1.01-8.83; OR = 2.04, 95% CI = 0.99-4.27; OR = 1.74, 95% CI = 1.00-3.02, resp.).
Individuals carrying three risk polymorphisms of EPHX1 Tyr113His, XPD C156A, and GSTs presented a 400% increased skin cancer risk when compared to those with less than or equal to one polymorphism.
In conclusion, GSTs, EPHX1, and XPD are potential genetic factors for arsenic-induced skin cancers.
Numerous epidemiological studies have evaluated the association of Glutathione S-transferase P1 (GSTP1) Ile105Val polymorphism with the risk of skin cancer.
To derive a more precise estimation of the association between the GSTP1 Ile105Val polymorphism and skin cancer risk, a meta-analysis was performed.
We used odds ratios (ORs) with 95 % confidence intervals (CIs) to assess the association of GSTP1 Ile105Val polymorphism with skin cancer risk.
Overall, we found that GSTP1 Ile105Val polymorphism was not associated with skin cancer risk.
As no previous meta-analyses have examined the association of polymorphisms at GSTT1, GSTP1 Ile105Val with skin cancer risk and independently published studies have produced inconsistent conclusions, we were promoted to estimate the associations in the largest study to date.
Computer-assisted searches were carried out to systematically identify the studies of GST polymorphisms and skin cancer.
The fixed effects meta-analysis of 15 studies suggested no overall association between GSTT1 null and skin cancer.
These statistical data demonstrate that Ile105Val polymorphism of the GSTP1 gene may have genetic contribution to the development of skin cancer, MM in particular.
Several human GSTs, including GSTM1 and GSTT1, are polymorphic, and null polymorphisms have been associated with increased UVB erythemal sensitivity and skin cancer risk.
However, the expression of GST isozymes in skin cancer is not known.
Our results suggest that altered phenotypic expression of GST isozymes may be a useful marker for skin cancer.
This study focused on the possible involvement of GSTM1 and GSTT1 polymorphisms in risk modulation of cutaneous melanoma.
Within a case-control study, the presence of the null polymorphism at GSTM1 and GSTT1 was investigated in 188 cases of cutaneous melanoma and 152 controls.
Voclosporin is a relatively new calcineurin inhibitor that has been used successfully in humans for the treatment of plaque psoriasis.
Pimecrolimus is a calcineurin inhibitor which has a role in the treatment of psoriasis.
To investigate the possibility that gliosis causes the increased Mr 60,000 protein phosphorylation, cases of Pick's disease and multi-infarct dementia were also studied.
Because the hepatic receptor presents avidity for the carbohydrates of IgA1, a protein deposited in the glomerulus of patients with IgA nephropathy, the interaction of IgA1 with the mesangial ASGP-R was explored.
Interestingly, mutations in a PTP-PEST- and PTP-HSCF-interacting protein, PSTPIP1, were identified in humans with pyogenic sterile arthritis, pyoderma gangrenosum, and acne (PAPA) syndrome and familial recurrent arthritis, two autoinflammatory diseases.
Bruck Syndrome is a connective tissue disease associated with inactivating mutations in lysyl hydroxylase 2 (LH2/PLOD2) or FK506 binding protein 65 (FKBP65/FKBP10).
The phenotype overlaps with that seen with mutations in PLOD2 (Bruck syndrome II), which encodes LH2, the enzyme that hydroxylates the telopeptide lysyl residues.
PLOD2 and FKBP10 are genes mutated in Bruck syndrome (BS), a condition resembling osteogenesis imperfecta (OI), but that is also typically associated with congenital joint contractures.
Because of (i) absence of COL1A1/2 mutations, (ii) a consanguineous pedigree with a similarly affected sibling and (iii) the existence of congenital joint contractures with absence of recessive variants in PLOD2, mutation analysis was performed of the FKBP10 gene, recently associated with Bruck syndrome and/or recessive OI.
Bruck syndrome is a recessive disorder featuring congenital contractures in addition to bone fragility; Bruck syndrome type 2 is caused by mutations in PLOD2 encoding collagen lysyl hydroxylase, whereas Bruck syndrome type 1 has been mapped to chromosome 17, with evidence suggesting region 17p12, but the gene has remained elusive so far.
This suggested that the association of Nck to tyrosine 361 in Dok1 is necessary for the JNK and c-Jun activation by glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor or RET-MEN2B.
Because a high level of the JNK phosphorylation was observed in the cells expressing RET-MEN2B, its strong activation via Nck binding to Dok1 may be responsible for aggressive properties of medullary thyroid carcinoma developed in MEN 2B.
In this report, using a constitutively activated Ret TK form, Ret-ptc 2, we demonstrate that the MEN 2B as the activated WT Ret TK binds to several SH2 signalling proteins such as Shc, Grb-2, Phospholipase Cgamma, Crk and Nck.
However, in contrast to the activated WT form, expression of the MEN 2B mutated Ret-ptc 2 results in the tyrosine phosphorylation of a panel of proteins which interestingly interact with Crk and Nck.
Of the 43 patients with advanced anal carcinoma evaluable for PD-L1 expression, 32 (74%) had PD-L1-positive tumors as assessed with the 22C3 prototype assay, of whom 25 were enrolled between April and September 2014.
In this population of patients with PD-L1-positive advanced squamous cell anal carcinoma, pembrolizumab demonstrated a manageable safety profile and encouraging antitumor activity.
To evaluate the expression of programmed cell death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) in anal cancer.
SIOD is rare disorder related to SMARCAL1 or SMARCAL2 gene mutation, including (among other comorbidities) T-cell immunodeficiency, nephrotic syndrome, and renal failure.
Schimke immuno-osseous dysplasia (SIOD) is a pleiotropic disorder caused by mutations in the SWI/SNF2-related, matrix-associated, actin-dependent regulator of chromatin, subfamily a-like-1 (SMARCAL1) gene, with multiple clinical features, notably end-stage renal disease.
SIOD, which is caused by mutations of SMARCAL1, is a rare autosomal recessive disease with its prominent features being skeletal dysplasia, T cell deficiency, and renal failure.
For example, mutations in SMARCAL1 (also named HARP) cause Schimke immuno-osseous dysplasia (SIOD); a multi-system disorder characterized by growth defects, immune deficiencies, renal failure and other complex phenotypes.
Mutations in SMARCAL1 cause Schimke Immuno-Osseous Dysplasia (SIOD), an autosomal recessive multisystem developmental disease characterized by growth retardation, T-cell deficiency, bone marrow failure, anemia and renal failure.
We hypothesized that common polymorphisms in the five human lysyl oxidase genes (LOX, LOXL1, LOXL2, LOXL3, and LOXL4) may be associated with the phenotype of adolescent idiopathic scoliosis.
No evidence for significant association was found between coding or tag SNPs in LOX, LOXL1, LOXL2, LOXL3, and LOXL4 and the phenotype of adolescent idiopathic scoliosis.
The transcription factor Ets1 is expressed at low levels in epidermal keratinocytes under physiological conditions, but is over-expressed in cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (SCC).
We aimed to evaluate the role of ETS-1 in the invasiveness and progression of laryngeal squamous carcinoma, as well as to determine the correlations between clinicopathological characteristics and expression of this molecule.
We assessed the levels of ETS-1 in a total of 96 laryngeal specimens of varying degrees of dysplasia, microinvasive squamous carcinoma (8), and invasive squamous carcinoma (60), using normal mucosal epithelium (10) as a positive control.
We found a significantly higher ETS-1 expression in invasive laryngeal squamous cell carcinomas than in dysplasia (P&lt;0.001).
This data suggest that ETS-1 expression may play an important role in tumor invasion, and may function in the initiation of the invasive process in laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma.
Immunohistochemical staining showed Ets-1 expression in 82 cases of 156 carcinomas (53%): 36 of 52 (69%) squamous cell carcinomas, 41 of 96 (43%) adenocarcinomas, and 5 of 8 (63%) other carcinomas.
Etamicastat is a dopamine Beta-hydroxylase (DBetaH) inhibitor currently in clinical development for the treatment of hypertension and heart failure.
Etamicastat is a new dopamine-Beta-hydroxylase (DBetaH) inhibitor currently in clinical development for the treatment of hypertension and heart failure.
In this Review, we discuss how SSEs are controlled as part of genome maintenance pathways in eukaryotes, with an emphasis on the elaborate mechanisms that regulate the members of the major SSE families - including the xeroderma pigmentosum group F-complementing protein (XPF) and MMS and UV-sensitive protein 81 (MUS81)-dependent nucleases, and the flap endonuclease 1 (FEN1), XPG and XPG-like endonuclease 1 (GEN1) enzymes - during processes such as DNA adduct repair, Holliday junction processing and replication stress.
The human HJ resolvase GEN1 is a member of the XPG/Rad2 family of 5'-flap endonucleases.
The structure of the GEN1 protein reveals it to have an elaborated FEN-XPG family fold that is modified for its role in four-way junction resolution.
The GEN1 core is similar to other Rad2/XPG nucleases.
Comparison with FEN superfamily members, including XPG, EXO1, and GEN1, identifies superfamily motifs such as the helical gateway that select for ss-dsDNA junctions and provides key biological insights into nuclease specificity and regulation.
Superfamily members, such as flap endonucleases, exonuclease 1, DNA repair protein XPG, endonuclease GEN1 and the 5'-3'-exoribonucleases, play key roles in many cellular processes such as DNA replication and repair, recombination, transcription, RNA turnover and RNA interference.
It is a member of the 5' structure-specific nuclease family of exonucleases and endonucleases that includes FEN-1, XPG, and GEN1.
FEN1 5' nuclease superfamily members acting in nucleotide excision repair (XPG), mismatch repair (EXO1), and homologous recombination (GEN1) paradoxically incise structurally distinct bubbles, ends, or Holliday junctions, respectively.
The current study sought to localise the sites of CpG methylation within Prm1 and Prm3, and to identify the main transcription factors regulating TPBeta expression through Prm3 in the prostate adenocarcinoma PC-3 and LNCaP cell lines.
Mechanistically, we recently discovered that both TPAlfa and TPBeta form functional signalling complexes with members of the protein kinase C-related kinase (PRK) family, AGC- kinases essential for the epigenetic regulation of androgen receptor (AR)-dependent transcription and promising therapeutic targets for treatment of castrate-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC).
Despite exhibiting several functional and regulatory differences, the role of the individual TP isoforms in neoplastic diseases is largely unknown.This study evaluated expression of the TPAlfa and TPBeta isoforms in tumour microarrays of the benign prostate and different pathological (Gleason) grades of prostate cancer (PCa).
Hence, focusing on the setting of prostate cancer, this study investigated whether TPAlfa and/or TPBeta might also complex with PRK2 and PRK3 to regulate their activity and neoplastic responses.
Previous data by our laboratory demonstrated amplified thromboxane-A2 signaling was associated with poor prognoses in bladder cancer patients and overexpression of the thromboxane-A2 isoform-Beta receptor (TPBeta), but not TPAlfa, induced malignant transformation of immortalized bladder cells in vivo.
Interestingly, in contrast to the stimulatory effect of ERAlfa on HADHB enzyme activity observed in the previous study, silencing of ERBeta enhanced the enzyme activity of HADHB in the present study, suggesting that ERBeta plays an inhibitory role in HADHB enzyme activity in the breast cancer cells.
IMMP2L, the gene encoding the inner mitochondrial membrane peptidase subunit 2-like protein, has been reported as a candidate gene for Tourette syndrome, autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and additional neurodevelopmental disorders.
Here we genotyped 100 trio families with an index proband with autism spectrum disorder in Han Chinese population and found three cases with rare exonic IMMP2L deletions.
A study in a Caucasian population has identified two single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in ZNF533, one in DOCK4, and two in IMMP2L, which were all significantly associated with autism.
The present study aimed to investigate whether ZNF533, DOCK4, and IMMP2L genes are also associated with autism in a northeastern Chinese Han population.
Although no excess CNVs, either deletions or duplications, were found in the ADHD cohort relative to controls, the inherited rare CNV-associated gene set was significantly enriched for genes reported as candidates in studies of autism, schizophrenia and Tourette syndrome, including A2BP1, AUTS2, CNTNAP2 and IMMP2L.
We screened 39 GTS patients, and, due to the localization of IMMP2L in the critical region for the autistic disorder (AD) locus on chromosome 7q (AUTS1), 95 multiplex AD families; however, no coding mutations were found in either GTS or AD patients.
Northern blot hybridization of RNA from different human brain tumors showed very low amounts of TSC-22 mRNA in most investigated samples of GBM, anaplastic astrocytoma, and some other tumors.
Human genetic studies have found heterozygous deletions affecting NRXN1 and NRXN2, encoding Alfa-neurexin I (Nrxn1Alfa) and Alfa-neurexin II (Nrxn2Alfa), in individuals with autism spectrum disorders and schizophrenia.
To assess whether the heterozygous loss of neurexins results in behaviors relevant to autism or schizophrenia, we used mice with heterozygous (HET) deletion of Nrxn1Alfa or Nrxn2Alfa.
Our findings demonstrate that the heterozygous loss of Alfa-neurexin I and Alfa-neurexin II in mice leads to phenotypes relevant to autism and schizophrenia.
The deletion contains several genes including PPP2R5B, which has been associated with intellectual disability and overgrowth; NRXN2, which has been associated with intellectual disability and autism spectrum disorder; and CDCA5, which is part of the cohesin pathway, as are all the five known CdLS genes.
Human genetic studies have discovered mutations disrupting exons of the NRXN2 gene, which encodes the synaptic adhesion protein Alfa-neurexin II (Nrxn2Alfa), in two unrelated individuals with autism, but a causal link between NRXN2 and the disorder remains unclear.
To begin to test the hypothesis that Nrxn2Alfa deficiency contributes to the symptoms of autism, we employed Nrxn2Alfa knockout (KO) mice that genetically model Nrxn2Alfa deficiency in vivo.
Our findings demonstrate a causal role for the loss of Nrxn2Alfa in the genesis of autism-related behaviors in mice.
In the present study, we explored the physiological relevance of Granzyme A in the control of pulmonary Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection in vivo.
Our results show that, even though Granzyme A is expressed by cytotoxic cells from mouse lungs during pulmonary infection, its deficiency in knockout mice does not have an effect in the control of M. tuberculosis infection.
In addition our findings indicate that absence of Granzyme A does not affect the protection conferred by the live-attenuated M. tuberculosis vaccine MTBVAC.
Altogether, our findings are in apparent contradiction with previously published in vitro results and suggest that Granzyme A does not have a crucial role in vivo in the protective response to tuberculosis.
The tuberculosis group had a significantly higher concentration of granzyme A than the silicosis and lung cancer groups (P &lt; 0.05), and the silicosis group and lung cancer group had similar protein concentration trends (P &gt; 0.05).
Our results reveal enhanced intra- and extracellular expression of gzmA and B in patients with pulmonary TB, suggesting that gzms are part of the host response to tuberculosis.
Our results suggest that granzyme A could be considered another biomarker of TB, that can be used, other than IFN-Gamma, to discriminate between patients with active TB and LTBI subjects in a well characterized cohort of confirmed Mycobacterium tuberculosis-infected individuals.
Thus, murine transcriptome analysis can be used to predict immunological responses in cattle allowing the prioritisation of CXCLl9, CXCL10, Granzyme A and IL-22 as potential additional readout systems for the ante-mortem diagnosis of bovine tuberculosis.
Nafamostat, camostat and aprotinin markedly reduced tryptic activity on the apical surface of cystic fibrosis airway epithelial monolayers, suggesting prostasin as the major source of such activity and supporting strategies targeting prostasin for inactivation.
Understanding the mechanism by which prostasin and its inhibitors regulate sodium channels has provided a new insight into the treatment of hypertension and some other diseases like cystic fibrosis.
Because ENaC-mediated dehydration contributes to cystic fibrosis (CF), prostasin and matriptase are potential therapeutic targets, but their catalytic competence on airway epithelial surfaces has been unclear.
As a first step toward understanding the molecular mechanisms of neuroblastoma differentiation we analyzed the expression pattern of the developmentally important Homeobox genes in cells treated with retinoic acid.
The strategy employed involved rapid screening of a cDNA library prepared from retinoic acid treated human LA-N-5 neuroblastoma cells for Homeobox genes by the polymerase chain reaction.
Preliminary studies indicate that there is an induction of Homeobox gene expression in differentiating LA-N-5 neuroblastoma cells.
We hypothesized that Nrf2 modulates progression from acute tubular damage to renal fibrosis.
We asked whether Nrf2 deletion increases renal injury in mice following unilateral ureteral obstruction (UUO).
We studied Nrf2 in renal biopsies of patients with acute, subacute and chronic tubulointerstitial nephritis (TIN).
The aim of this study was to evaluate the effects of resistance exercise programs on the expression of transcription factors Nrf2 and nuclear factor KB (NF-KB) in CKD patients on hemodialysis (HD).
In conclusion, these data suggest that resistance exercises seem to be capable of inducing Nrf2 activation in CKD patients on HD.
Activate Nrf2 could inhibit the activation of NLRP3 inflammasome in acute liver injury and severe lupus nephritis.
Here, we show that the loss of Nrf2 suppresses fibrosis and inflammation in a unilateral ureter obstruction (UUO) model of CKD in mice.
These results demonstrate that Nrf2-related inflammasome activation can promote CKD symptoms via infiltration of M1 macrophages.
Thus, we have identified the Nrf2 pathway as a promising therapeutic target for CKD.
Reduced nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (NRF2) pathway activity was reported in models of chronic kidney disease (CKD).
We conclude that spontaneous phasic contractions of human sigmoid circular smooth muscle may be mediated by activation of NK2 receptors, calcium release from intracellular stores, and activation of calmodulin and protein kinase C. In ulcerative colitis patients, spontaneous phasic contractions are decreased, and this decrease may be in part due to overproduction of hydrogen peroxide affecting sigmoid circular muscle.
In a prospective, randomized, double-blind study, we enrolled 48 premedicated and calm 2-6-year-old children undergoing inguinal hernia repair.
We conclude that Ca(2+) stores of HSCM cells may be reduced in ulcerative colitis and that the signal transduction pathway of neurokinin A-induced contraction switches from calmodulin- and protein kinase C-dependent in normal cells to protein kinase C-dependent in ulcerative colitis cells.
We report suspected ocular albinism in two Japanese sisters, caused by mutations in the HPS6 (Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome 6) gene.
Biallelic mutations in the photoreceptor-expressed aryl hydrocarbon receptor interacting protein-like 1 (AIPL1) are associated with autosomal recessive Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA), the most severe form of inherited retinopathy in early childhood.
Our findings provide insight into the mechanism underlying the co-chaperone role of AIPL1 and will be critical for ensuring an early and effective diagnosis of AIPL1 LCA patients.
Malfunction of mutant AIPL1 proteins triggers a severe form of Leber congenital amaurosis and leads to blindness.
Genetic mutations in aryl hydrocarbon receptor interacting protein-like 1 (AIPL1) cause photoreceptor degeneration associated with Leber congenital amaurosis 4 (LCA4) in human patients.
Mutations in AIPL1, including many missense mutations in the FKBP domain, have been associated with Leber congenital amaurosis, a severe blinding disease.
Its dysfunction, caused by mutations in either the enzyme itself or AIPL1 (aryl hydrocarbon receptor-interacting protein-like 1), leads to retinal diseases culminating in blindness.
Undiagnosed human patients with early-onset blindness should be screened for this AIPL1 variant.
Biallelic mutations in AIPL1 cause Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA), a devastating retinal degeneration characterized by the loss or severe impairment of vision within the first few years of life.
We also reveal that in-phase exon skipping occurs normally at a low frequency in the retina, but arises abundantly as a consequence of specific AIPL1 variations, suggesting a tolerance threshold for the expression of these alternative transcripts in the retina normally, which is exceeded in LCA.
Our data confirm the disease-association of the AIPL1 variations investigated and reveal for the first time that aberrant splicing of AIPL1 is an underlying mechanism of disease in LCA.
Currently, 21 genes are known to be associated with LCA and recurrent mutations have been observed in AIPL1, CEP290, CRB1 and GUCY2D.
To investigate the influence of experimental obstructive jaundice and exogenous bombesin (BBS) and neurotensin (NT) administration on the expression of the tight junction (TJ)-protein claudin-4 in intestinal epithelium of rats.
To evaluate the effect of bombesin (BBS) and neurotensin (NT) on intestinal histopathology, intestinal oxidative stress, and endotoxemia in experimental obstructive jaundice.
The MT-1 and MT-2 proteins are encoded by a family of eight genes (MT-1A, MT-1B, MT-1E, MT-1F, MT-1G, MT-IH, MT-1X, and MT-2A), and reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction was used to determine which genes were expressed in the normal bladder and in bladder cancer.
The expression of MT-1E mRNA was variable in both normal bladder and bladder cancer specimens.
Seventeen molecules, including transcription factor E2F, T-cell-specific transcription factor, Src (known as "proto-oncogene tyrosine-protein kinase of sarcoma"), interferon regulatory factor 1, thymidylate synthase, cyclin B, cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) 4, CDK, caspase-1, vitamin D receptor, histone deacetylase, MAPK/ERK kinase, bcl-2-associated X protein, runt-related transcription factor 1, PR domain zinc finger protein 1, platelet-derived growth factor receptor, and interleukin 1, were identified as candidate molecules.
Therefore, targeting the caspase-1/PPARGamma/MCAD pathway might be a promising therapeutic approach to prevent tumor progression.Tumor associated macrophages (TAMs) promote cancer progression.
Here, the author show that caspase-1 promotes TAMs differentiation by attenuating medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase activity and that inhibition of this axis results in suppression of tumour growth in a transgenic mouse model of breast cancer.
In the 20 patients, the pathological diagnosis of underlying non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) comprised follicular lymphoma (FL, n = 12), diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL, n = 4), mantle cell lymphoma (MCL, n = 2), enteropathy associated T cell lymphoma (ETL, n = 1) and anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL, n = 1).
50 patients with non-Hodgkin (n = 27) and Hodgkin lymphoma (n = 23) were examined with a plain T2-weighted TSE sequence (parameters: TE 90 ms, TR &gt;2.500 ms, slice thickness 8 mm, slice interval 0.8 mm, ETL 20, NEX 4), and with spiral CT following oral and intravenous administration of contrast agent.
The methylation status of septin-9 gene in plasma has been developed as a promising biomarker to aid in the diagnosis of colorectal cancer (CRC).
The SEPT9 gene methylation assay is the first FDA-approved blood assay for colorectal cancer (CRC) screening.
This study aims to examine the influence of algorithm and subject-related factors, including cancer stage, age, sex, and cancer location, on the performance of the SEPT9 gene methylation test, an assay approved by the US FDA for colorectal cancer (CRC) screening.
The test comprises a qualitative assay for the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) detection of methylated Septin9 DNA, the presence of which is associated with colorectal cancer: however, positive results should be verified by colonoscopy or sigmoidoscopy.
Clinically, we observed a positive correlation between stromal expression of FAP, p-STAT3, and CCL2 in human intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma, a highly aggressive liver cancer with dense desmoplastic stroma, where elevated levels of stromal FAP predicted a poor survival outcome.
We previously discovered that polymorphisms in or near CELF6 may be associated with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) in humans and that the deletion of this gene in mice results in a partial ASD-like phenotype.
Analysis of common variants near the corresponding genes in the AGRE collection implicated the RNA binding protein CELF6 in autism risk.
The Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) and The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) data were mined to verify the change of NDUFA4L2 expression level in ccRCC tissues.
NDUFA4L2 was verified to be overexpressed in ccRCC tissues and its expression level was increased accordingly as the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) stage progressed.
NDUFA4L2 is overexpressed in VHL-deficient cell lines and neuroblastoma.
The clinical significance of NDUFA4L2 in clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) has not been well studied.
Our study has provided the first clinical relevance of NDUFA4L2 in human cancer and suggested that HCC patients with NDUFA4L2 overexpression may be suitable candidates for HIF inhibitor treatment.
We delineated the functions of the hypoxia-inducible factor-1Alfa (HIF1Alfa) target NADH dehydrogenase (ubiquinone) 1 alpha subcomplex 4-like 2 (NDUFA4L2) in clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) and characterized NDUFA4L2 as a novel molecular target for ccRCC treatment.
We evaluated normal kidney and ccRCC patient microarray and RNAseq data from Oncomine and The Cancer Genome Atlas for NDUFA4L2 mRNA levels and the clinical implications of high NDUFA4L2 expression.
The purpose of this study is to test whether miR-497 can modulate macrophage foam cell formation, an initiating event in atherosclerosis.
In conclusion, miR-497 contributes to oxLDL-induced lipid deposition in macrophages largely via targeting of apelin and thus represents a potential therapeutic target for atherosclerosis.
However, to date, no information about the role of miR-497 in the development of atherosclerosis has been reported.
This study investigated the possible role of miR-497 in vascular endothelial cell injury during the early stage of atherosclerosis.
Overall, our study shows that miR-497 might play a role in the development of atherosclerosis by inducing apoptosis and suppressing the proliferation of vascular endothelial cells.
Therefore, miR-497 could be a potential therapeutic target for the treatment of atherosclerosis.
miR-34a-5p and miR-497-5p were increasingly up-regulated, while miR-434-3p was progressively down-regulated when atherosclerosis progressed.
However, the expression of VASH-1 and its clinical value in bladder cancer remain unknown.
The current study analyzed the expression of VASH-1, as well as the expression of the angiogenesis-related factors vascular endothelial growth factor-A, hypoxia inducible factor-1Alfa and cluster of differentiation 34 in bladder cancer tissues from 50 patients using immunohistochemistry.
The current study demonstrated that VASH-1 is primarily expressed in the cytoplasm of bladder cancer cells and in a fraction of vascular endothelial cells.
Collectively, the results of the current study suggest that VASH-1 is clinically significant in bladder cancer and its high expression may predict the progression and prognosis of patients with bladder cancer.
Several studies have demonstrated that VASH1 plays important roles in tumor angiogenesis but the role of this angiogenic inhibitor in renal cell carcinoma (RCC) has not been elucidated.
Renal cell carcinoma is highly vascularised, but the significance of endogenous VASH1 in renal cell carcinoma has not been defined.
To identify VASH1 expression and its possible relationship with various clinicopathological factors and prognosis in renal cell carcinoma.
VASH1 expression may be useful for estimating the prognosis of renal cell carcinoma.
Further studies of the role of VASH1 in renal cell carcinoma involving larger sample sizes are warranted.
Several studies have demonstrated that VASH1 plays important roles in tumor angiogenesis but the role of this angiogenic inhibitor in renal cell carcinoma (RCC) has not been elucidated until now.
CYP17A1 and CYP11B1 were positive in 21 (100%) and 17 (81%) adenomas, respectively.
F-DST significantly decreased after adrenalectomy, and most of the adenomas were immunohistochemically positive for CYP17A1 and CYP11B1 as well as CYP11B2.
The aims of our study were to determine whether the CYP11B1 expression was regulated through DNA methylation in hypercortisolemia with cortisol-producing adenoma (CPA), and to investigate a possible relationship between DNA methylation and somatic mutations identified in CPA.
Four familial forms of primary aldosteronism (FH-I to FH-IV) have been described.
We also analyzed the expression of cortisol-producing CYP11B1 and aldosterone-producing CYP11B2 enzymes in adenoma tissue from 57 patients with aldosterone-producing adenoma, employing immunohistochemistry with digital image analysis.
Four APAs showed a predominant (&gt;=50%) zona fasciculata-like cell pattern: one tumor had CYP11B1 H-score = 150, no detectable CYP11B2 expression, and harbored a PRKACA p.Leu206Arg mutation (that we have reported previously elsewhere), one had no CYP11B1 expression, CYP11B2 H-score = 40, and no mutations; the remaining two adenomas had high CYP11B1 H-score (160 and 240, respectively) and low CYP11B2 H-score (30 and 15, respectively), with the latter harboring a CTNNB1 p.Ser45Phe activating mutation.
One of five aldosterone-producing adenomas had a predominant zona glomerulosa-like pattern, CYP11B1 H-score = 15, CYP11B2 H-score = 180, and no mutations.
The majority of aldosterone-producing adenomas with concurrent subclinical cortisol hypersecretion were composed mainly of zona fasciculata-like cells, while CYP11B1 and CYP11B2 immunostaining demonstrated clear heterogeneity.
Hydrolethalus can also be difficult to distinguish from certain skeletal dysplasias such as the short rib-polydactyly syndromes and campomelic dysplasia.
It is proposed that cases of hydrolethalus syndrome with short limbs constitute a separate type of lethal osteochondrodysplasia mimicking short rib-polydactyly syndromes.
miR-145 and miR-20a-5p previously reported as diagnosis biomarker in treatment naive RRMS patients and their expression after IFN-Beta therapy might be indicative of molecular mechanism of IFN-Beta.
Here, in order to clarify the ambiguous molecular mechanism of IFN-Beta and evaluate the potential use of them as a biomarker for monitoring of therapy, we investigated the expression of miR-145 and miR-20a-5p in blood sample of 15 treatment naive RRMS patients, 15 IFN-Beta-treated RRMS patients, and 15 healthy volunteers (HVs).
In this study, we have focused our investigation on miR-20a, a member of the miR-17-92 cluster, whose expression is decreased in patients suffering from multiple sclerosis.
Seven miRNAs (miR-206, miR-132, miR-193b, miR-130b, miR-20a, miR-296, and miR-329) related to Alzheimer's disease (AD) were detected in serum using a quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) method.
This study identifies a set of miRNAs deregulated in CIS/RRMS and reconfirms the previously reported underexpression of hsa-miR-20a-5p in MS. hsa-miR-20a-5p and the other validated miRNAs may represent promising candidates for future evaluation as biomarkers for MS and could be of relevance in the pathophysiology of this disease.
We found that Tiam1-mediated Rac signaling functions in various aspects of tumorigenicity including the formation and progression of Ras-induced skin tumors and Wnt-induced intestinal tumors.
Here we show that Tiam1, a selective Rac GTPase activator, is a Wnt-responsive gene expressed in the base of intestinal crypts and up-regulated in mouse intestinal tumors and human colon adenomas.
However, invasion of malignant intestinal tumors is enhanced by a lack of Tiam1.
Osteoprotegerin (OPG) and receptor activator of NF-kB ligand (RANK-L) modulate the genesis and activity of osteoclasts, however their role in renal osteodystrophy pathogenesis has not been clarified so far.
Here, using an integrative approach, we have dissected the metabolic fingerprints of lung adenocarcinomas, and we show that Phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase (PHGDH), the rate-limiting enzyme in serine biosynthesis, is highly expressed in a adenocarcinoma subset with poor prognosis.
Our study provides evidence that a unique metabolic program is activated in a lung adenocarcinoma subset, described by PHGDH, which confers growth and survival and may have therapeutic implications.
Mice with colon-specific carcinoma--caused by either chromosomal (CDX2P 9.5-NLS Cre;Apc(+/flox), abbreviated to CPC;Apc) or microsatellite (CDX2P9.5-G19Cre;Apc(flox/flox) and CDX2P9.5-G22Cre;Apc(flox/flox)) instability, respectively--were administered chlorinated (10.0 mg/L chlorine) or tap (0.7 mg/L chlorine) water and evaluated for colon polyp formation.
In this study, total lipids (TLs) from silver carp brain were isolated into polar lipids (PLs) and neutral lipids (NLs), and the anticancer potential of the lipid fractions (LFs) was investigated using the human cervical carcinoma HeLa cell line.
Among the TLs, PLs have proven to be more effective in inducing cervical carcinoma cell death than NLs.
We have previously shown that plasmonic nanoparticles conjugated with nuclear-targeting and cytoplasm-targeting peptides (NLS and RGD, respectively) are capable of altering the cell cycle of human oral squamous carcinoma cells (HSC-3).
To determine the expression patterns of phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase (PHGDH) and serum squamous cell carcinoma antigen (SCC-Ag) in cervical cancer andtheir clinical significance and to explore their relationship with clinicopathological parameters.
In the present work, we utilized the plasmonic scattering property and the ability of nuclear-targeted silver nanoparticles (NLS/RGD-AgNPs) to induce programmed cell death in order to image in real-time the behavior of human oral squamous carcinoma (HSC-3) cell communities during and after the induction of apoptosis.
Mice carrying a CDX2P-NLS Cre recombinase transgene and a loxP-targeted Apc allele developed mainly colorectal tumors, with carcinomas seen in 6 of 36 (17%) of mice followed for 300 days.
La ragione per procedere alla fenestrazione con il laser e per il migliore controllo endoscopico delle estensione della resezione, e si puo visualizzare direttamente il collasso dell'ureterocele.
It seems a new signaling axis, SIRT1-SFRS10-LPIN1 axis, acting in the pathogenesis of AFLD exists.
SIRT1, SFRS10, and LIPIN1 had been separately reported to participate in lipid metabolism and the pathogenesis of AFLD.
It seems a new signaling axis, SIRT1-SFRS10-LIPIN1 axis, acting in the pathogenesis of AFLD exists.
Further study aimed at SIRT1-SFRS10-LIPIN1 signaling system will possibly offer a more effective therapeutic target for AFLD.
Emerging evidence suggests a pivotal role of lipin-1 as a crucial downstream regulator of SIRT1-AMPK signaling system that is likely to be ultimately responsible for development and progression of AFLD.
This review summarizes current knowledge about the role of lipin-1 in the pathogenesis of AFLD and its potential signal transduction mechanisms.
The aim of this review was to focus on the knowledge of the role of lipin-1 in the pathogenesis of alcoholic fatty liver.
Systematic review of animal clinical and cell level studies related to the function of lipin-1 on alcoholic fatty liver, alcoholic hepatitis and alcoholic liver cirrhosis disease.
In hepatocytes of alcoholic fatty liver disease (AFLD), ethanol increases the expression of lipin-1 through the AMPK-SREBP-1 signaling and the Lpin1Beta/Alfa ratio by SIRT1-SFRS10- Lpin1Beta/Alfa axis.
We discuss known inborn errors of CTGM, including deficiencies of: AGPAT2 (a form of generalized lipodystrophy), LPIN1 (childhood rhabdomyolysis), LPIN2 (an inflammatory condition, Majeed syndrome, described elsewhere in this issue), DGAT1 (protein loosing enteropathy), perilipin 1 (partial lipodystrophy), CGI-58 (gene ABHD5, neutral lipid storage disease (NLSD) with ichthyosis and "Jordan's anomaly" of vacuolated polymorphonuclear leukocytes), adipose triglyceride lipase (ATGL, gene PNPLA2, NLSD with myopathy, cardiomyopathy and Jordan's anomaly), hormone-sensitive lipase (HSL, gene LIPE, hypertriglyceridemia, and insulin resistance).
Transcripts were found and quantified for several isoforms of epithelial calcium channels (TRPV5, TRPV6), calcium buffer proteins (calbindin-D9K, calbindin-D28K), sodium-calcium exchangers (NCX1, NCX2, NCX3) and plasma membrane Ca2+-ATPase (PMCA1, PMCA2, PMCA3, and PMCA4) in native SCCD, cochlear lateral wall (LW) and stria vascularis (SV) of adult rat as well as Ca2+ channels in neonatal SCCD.
We found transcripts in primary cultures of semicircular canal duct (SCCD) epithelial cells from neonatal rats representing a complete transport system for transepithelial absorption of Ca2+ that is comprised of the epithelial Ca2+ channels ECaC1 (CaT2, TRPV5) and ECaC2 (CaT1, TRPV6), calbindin (calbindin-D9k, calbindin-D28k), Na+/Ca2+ exchanger (NCX1, NCX2, and NCX3), and plasma membrane Ca2+-ATPase (PMCA1, PMCA3, and PMCA4) by RT-PCR.
The five receptors bind the natural peptides with high affinity, but only sst2, sst5, and sst3 bind the short synthetic analogs used to treat acromegaly and neuroendocrine tumors.
We further identified 35 genes with differential expression in WLs from 0 to 12 months (long-term) weight loss, with 20 showing opposite expression patterns in acquired obesity, and 16/35 genes with significant expression-DNA methylation correlations.
The number of patients developing ferritin or vitamin B12 deficiency was significantly lower with WLS Forte compared with sMVS (P &lt; 0.05).
Over 90% of responders believe that WLS is an effective WL option and is more effective than self-directed diet and medical management of obesity.
This study examined the anti-obesity and anti-diabetic effects of fucoxanthin-rich wakame lipids (WLs) on high fat (HF) diet-induced obesity in mice.
There is therefore a biochemical and nutritional basis for the application of fucoxanthin-rich WLs as a functional food to prevent obesity and diabetes-related disorders.
We investigated the effects of a traditional Chinese herbal formula, Wulingsan (WLS), on renal stone prevention using an ethylene glycol-induced nephrocalcinosis rat model.
The mRNA expression of genes involved in the induction of autophagy in response to toxin (Esr1 and Pik3C3) and coregulators of autophagy and apoptosis (Bax and Cyld) were significantly upregulated in cdtB(+)wt S. Javiana-infected macrophages.
To determine the respective roles of epithelial versus stromal ERalpha in this response, the following tissue recombinants were constructed with prostatic epithelium (PRE) and stroma (S) from wild-type (wt) and ERalpha knockout (alphaERKO) mice: wt-S + wt-PRE, alphaERKO-S + alphaERKO-PRE, wt-S + alphaERKO-PRE and alphaERKO-S + wt-PRE.
In order to determine the respective roles of epithelial and stromal ERalpha in this response, the following tissue recombinants were constructed with prostatic epithelia (E) and stroma (S) from wt and ERKO mice: wt-S+wt-E, alphaERKO-S+alphaERKO-E, wt-S+alphaERKO-E, and alphaERKO-S+wt-E. A metaplastic response to DES was observed in wt-S+wt-E tissue recombinants.
In response to E2 treatment, grafts prepared with wt-S (wt-S + wt-E and wt-S + ko-E) showed similar large increases in epithelial labeling index, indicating that E2 stimulated epithelial proliferation despite a lack of epithelial ER alpha in wt-S + ko-E tissue recombinants.
Mutations in REEP1 have been identified in three types of neurological disorders, autosomal dominant form of Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia type 31 (SPG31), autosomal dominant distal hereditary motor neuronopathy type VB (HMN5B), and autosomal recessive form of congenital axonal neuropathy and diaphragmatic palsy.
Our study demonstrated further evidence of allelic heterogeneity in SPG31, mutant REEP1 mRNA dosage effects through NMD and intra-familial phenotype variability.
Mutations in spastin, strumpellin, or REEP1 cause hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP), a disease characterized by axonal degeneration.
We describe the clinical presentation and pathogeny of HSP through a report of a case due to a novel mutation of the REEP1 gene (SPG31).
Hereditary spastic paraplegia, SPG31, is a rare neurological disorder caused by mutations in REEP1 gene encoding the microtubule-interacting protein, REEP1.
Hereditary spastic paraplegias (HSPs; SPG1-76 plus others) are length-dependent disorders affecting long corticospinal axons, and the most common autosomal dominant forms are caused by mutations in genes that encode the spastin (SPG4), atlastin-1 (SPG3A) and REEP1 (SPG31) proteins.
To date, only dominant REEP1 mutations have been reported to be associated with a slowly progressive hereditary spastic paraplegia.
Here we report that upon transplantation of a well-defined aggressive murine B220+CD5+ Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia (CLL) cell clone, TCL1-192, into SCID mice one injection of a monoclonal antibody directed against SLAMF6 (AlfaSlamf6) abrogates tumor progression in the spleen, bone marrow and blood.
Similarly, progression of a murine B cell lymphoma, LMP2A/LambdaMyc, was also eliminated by AlfaSlamf6.
Based on the antigens expression and monoclonal antibody availability, CD150, CD48, CD229, CD352, CD319, CD272, CD86, CD200 and CD184 were subsequently tested in 24 NDMM, 8 relapsed MM (RMM), 6 plasma cell leukemia (PCL) and 13 healthy subjects.
Finally, this tumor did not express the PVR (CD155) and nectin-2 (CD112) ligands for the DNAM-1 activating NK receptor, which plays a crucial role in NK/neuroblastoma interactions.
As for the males with varicocele, Ig A and Ig M decrease is noticeable relative to the control group, 1,06+/-0,21 g/l and 0,61+/-0,19 g/l respectively (p&lt;0,05).
Detection of IgG and IgA sperm antibodies were negative in both man with and without varicocele.
A significant quantitative difference between the varicocele and control groups was also observed for serum IgA, seminal plasma IgA and IgM, and sperm-bound IgG, IgA, and IgM.
DHGA-D also significantly induced G1 cell cycle arrest, together with the suppression of glycogen synthase kinase 3Beta and retinoblastoma phosphorylation and cyclin D1 expression.
C1P induced phosphorylation of glycogen synthase kinase-3Beta and the product of retinoblastoma gene, and enhanced cyclin D1 protein levels.
Replacement of distention with pharmacological relaxation reduced the increase in cyclin D1 expression, phosphorylation of retinoblastoma, Akt-Thr(308), glycogen synthase kinase 3 beta and p38, but not extracellular signal-regulated kinases.
Switching therapy to aflibercept, a more recent vascular endothelial growth factor-A (VEGF-A) inhibitor, as well as VEGF-B and placental growth factor inhibitor, might improve the clinical outcome in patients with CRVO who respond insufficiently to ranibizumab/bevacizumab.
In this study, the expression of bFGF, vimentin, CD 34, c-kit (or CD 117), desmin, S-100 protein, and alpha-smooth muscle actin (alpha-SMA) in SFTs, hemangiopericytomas (HPC), gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST), and dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans (DFSP) were evaluated to assess their usefulness in the differential diagnosis of these lesions.
Glomerulopathy with fibronectin deposits (GFND) is a rare autosomal dominant disease characterized by massive fibronectin deposits, leading to end-stage renal failure.
Glomerulopathy with fibronectin (FN) deposits (GFND) is an autosomal dominant disease with age-related penetrance, characterized by proteinuria, microscopic hematuria, hypertension, and massive glomerular deposits of FN that lead to end-stage renal failure.
Fibronectin glomerulopathy (GFND) is a newly recognized autosomal dominant disease of the kidney that results in albuminuria, microscopic hematuria, hypertension, renal tubular acidosis type IV, and end-stage renal disease in the 2d to 6th decade of life.
Multilocus linkage analysis has suggested that the Waardenburg syndrome type 1 (WS1) locus is flanked by placental alkaline phosphatase (ALPP) and fibronectin 1 (FN1).
Furthermore, Ehd3(-/-); Ehd4(-/-) mice provide a unique model to elucidate mechanisms of glomerular endothelial injury which is observed in a wide variety of human renal and extra-renal diseases.
Defective apoptosis of lamina propria T cells (LPTs) is involved in the pathogenesis of Crohn's disease.
LPTs were isolated from mucosal samples of patients with Crohn's disease or ulcerative colitis and healthy individuals (controls).
LPTs from patients with Crohn's disease had higher levels of survivin than LPTs from patients with ulcerative colitis or controls.
Levels of survivin were low in LPTs from patients with ulcerative colitis and controls as a result of ubiquitin-mediated proteasome degradation.
In LPTs from patients with Crohn's disease, survivin bound to the heat shock protein (HSP)90, and therefore was resistant to proteasome degradation.
Levels of survivin are increased in LPTs from patients with Crohn's disease (compared with ulcerative colitis and controls) because survivin interacts with HSP90 and prevents proteasome degradation.
With the advantage of the low risk of hypoglycemia, DPP-IV attracted the attention of medicinal chemists as a new target for oral hypoglycemics.
Efficacy and safety studies of dipetidyl peptidase inhibitors (DPP-IV), sitagliptin, vildagliptin and linagliptin provide similar improvements in HbA1c levels when compared with metformin, sulfonylureas or glitazones without contributing to weight gain and hypoglycemia.
Dipeptidyl peptase 4 (DPP-IV) inhibitors and glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP1) analogues as insulin secretagogues have a lower risk for hypoglycemia than sulfonylurea and insulin.
For hypoglycaemia, MH-OR, 95%CI = 0.13 [0.09, 0.19], p &lt; 0.00001(DPP-IV inhibitors + met vs. su + met).
To investigate the role of insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1), in localized osteosarcoma, serum levels of IGF-1, IGFBP-2, and IGFBP-3 were measured in 224 similarly treated, newly diagnosed patients.
Calreticulin, a phagocytic "eat me" signal carried by placental EVs significantly inhibited ovarian cancer growth (P = 0.001).
We confirm that treatment with DNMT inhibitors upregulates expression of the antigen processing and presentation molecules B2M, CALR, CD58, PSMB8, PSMB9 at the RNA and protein level in a wider range of colon and ovarian cancer cell lines and treatment time points than had been described previously.
Here, we analyzed the impact of CALR expression levels detected by microarray finding a positive correlation between CALR and the expression of a metagene indicating the presence of cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL) in NSCLC and ovarian cancer.
Combination of two parameters (CALR + DC (dendritic cell) in NSCL and CALR + aDC in ovarian cancer) or three parameters (CALR + CTL + DC in NSCL and CALR + CTL + aDC in ovarian cancer) had a significant impact on overall patient survival in NSCL (Adenoconsortium) and ovarian cancer (TCGA collection), allowing the stratification of patients in high-risk and low-risk groups.
In addition, CALR and aDC alone have a significant impact on overall survival in ovarian cancer.
Remarkably, we found that tumoural CALRhigh-phenotype was predictive of positive clinical responses to therapy with ICD inducers (radiotherapy and paclitaxel) in lung and ovarian cancer patients, respectively.
Adenovirus expressing calreticulin-E7 (Ad-CRT-E7) has shown promising results in the cervical cancer murine model.
Considering that Baihui (GV20), Dazhui (GV14), Quchi (LI11) and Yongquan (KI1) are commonly used in clinics for stroke treatment and are easy to locate, we chose the above four acupoints as the combination for electro acupuncture treatment which was performed once a day for different time periods.
B oTAaneHHoM nocneonepamyNoHHoM nepNoAe (4epe3 1 roA) y 32 namyNeHToB NMena MecTo HopMoToHNR (BTO cocTaBnRno B cpeAHeM 16,0+/-2,3 MM pT.cT.
4epe3 1 roA cywecTBeHHblx N3MeHeHNN cpeAHNx BenN4NH onToMeTpN4ecKNx noKa3aTeneN no cpaBHeHNh c noKa3aTenRMN 6-MecR4Horo nepNoAa He HabnhAanocb.
Nocne Ha4ana npNeMa BHyTpb ceneKTNBHblx &amp;#x03B2;-bnoKaTopoB npoBoANnocb noBTopHoe obcneAoBaHNe B cpoKN 4epe3 2, 4 HeA, 3 Mec, 6 Mec, 4epe3 1 roA.
Bo 2-N (NccneAyeMoN) rpynne cpeAHNe noKa3aTenN MKO3 N obweN cBeToBoN 4yBcTBNTenbHocTN myeHTpanbHoN obnacTN ceT4aTKN Ao ne4eHNR cocTaBNnN 0,08+/-0,02 N 4,23+/-0,2 AB, 4epe3 1 Mec nocne BBeAeHNR NMnnaHTaTa c AeKcaMeTa3oHoM - 0,21+/-0,04 N 11,77+/-0,98 AB, 4epe3 1 roA - 0,23+/-0,17 N 5,2+/-0,78 AB cooTBeTcTBeHHo.
OmyeHKa Nx cocToRHNR npoBoANnacb npN obpaweHNN namyNeHTa c ocHoBHoN XanoboN Ha ronoBHyh bonb (BN3NT 1), 4epe3 6 Mec (BN3NT 2), 4epe3 1roA (BN3NT 3).
OmyeHKa Nx cocToRHNR npoBoANnacb npN obpaweHNN namyNeHTa c ocHoBHoN XanoboN Ha ronoBHyh bonb (BN3NT 1), 4epe3 6 Mec (BN3NT 2), 4epe3 1roA (BN3NT 3).
MeToAaMN onTN4ecKoN KorepeHTHoN ToMorpaoNN N MNKponepNMeTpNN obcneAoBaHbl B ANHaMNKe 78 bonbHblx (82 rna3a) c npo3pa4HblMN onTN4ecKNMN cpeAaMN KaK B Ha4ane (4epe3 1 Mec nocne ycnewHoN onepamyNN no noBoAy NMP), TaK N B KoHmye cpoKa HabnhAeHNR (He MeHee 1 roAa).
We report the effectiveness of a less-invasive treatment for intractable LBP from superior cluneal nerve entrapment neuropathy (SCN-EN) and gluteus medius muscle (GMeM) pain.
Transcriptome comparisons of UCHL1 KDs versus vector control identified a list of 306 differentially expressed genes (at least 2-fold change; p &lt;0.05) which included genes known to be involved in cancer like ACTA2, POSTN, LIF, FBXL7, FBXW11, GDF15, HEY2, but also potential novel genes such us IGLL5, ABCA4, AQP3, AQP4, CALB1, and ALK.
This case demonstrates that blastoid morphology in cyclin D1-negative MCL with IGL-CCND2 translocation indicates progression to a more aggressive neoplasm, similar to cyclin D1-positive MCL.
For the transcriptome analysis, we found some genes related to Alzheimer's disease (LRP1), an insulin-like growth factor receptor (IGF2R), immunity genes (IGL family and IGJ), two genes related to inflammatory reaction (CXCL5 and CCL3), one gene related to maintenance of cellular morphology (NHS), one gene considered to be a strong apoptosis inductor (LGALS14), and several transcripts of the neuroblastoma breakpoint family (NBPF).
For those who screened positive, standard treatment for TB or preemptive treatment for cryptococcal infection was initiated, followed by ART 2 weeks later.
Glial fibrillary acidic protein, AQP1, and AQP4-biomarkers of Muller cell activity-are significantly increased in human eyes with diabetes, confirming that Muller cells are precociously affected by diabetes mellitus.
Diabetes produced a decrease in claudin-5 expression in the hippocampus and striatum and reduced AQP4 in the hippocampus.
The reduction of AQP4 levels produced by diabetes was not reversed by exercise.
However, Qctn treatments inhibited diabetes-induced increases in GFAP and AQP4 expression.
In a mouse model of Coxsackievirus B3 (CVB3)-induced chronic myocarditis, the delivery of the adenovirus-containing IL-17 receptor A (Ad-IL17RA:Fc) reduced IL-17A production and decreased the number of Th17 cells in the spleen and heart, leading to the down-regulation of systemic TNF-Alfa and IL-6 production.
Ad-IL17R:Fc reduced the left ventricle dilation and decreased the mortality in viral myocarditis, leading to DCM (56% in the Ad-IL17R:Fc versus 76% in the Ad-null group).
We determined that the delivery of IL-17-RA:Fc reduces cardiac remodeling, improves function, and decreases mortality in viral myocarditis leading to DCM, possibly by suppressing fibrosis.
Macrophages expressing IL-17 receptors were observed infiltrating the hearts of mice with myocarditis, and genetic ablation of IL-17RA altered MPhi recruitment.
Serum BNP (brain naturiuretic peptide) and ANP (atrial natriuretic peptide) levels are reportedly elevated in patients with thyrotoxicosis.
We measured serum ANP and BNP levels in 130 patients with thyrotoxicosis and correlated them with HF severity and thyroid function.
These data suggest that the cardiovascular condition is the major factor responsible for the elevated serum BNP and ANP levels in thyrotoxic patients, while thyrotoxicosis itself is an independent but minor contributing factor.
Plasma ANP levels are impaired in several endocrine diseases : the plasma hormone levels increase in hypercortisolism, hyperaldosteronism, thyrotoxicosis and inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion; it decreases in hypothyroidism.
Further, the CT genotype of the RAD23B Ala249Val was associated with increased esophageal cancer risk (OR = 1.44; 95% CI = 1.05-1.97), whereas the poly-AT-/+ genotype of the XPC intron 9 conferred a decreased risk (OR = 0.71, 95% CI = 0.51-0.97).
The present study aimed to systemically review the evidence regarding the relationship between circulating macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) levels and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), as well as the associations between several polymorphisms in the MIF gene and SLE susceptibility.
Macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) is a proinflammatory cytokine involved in systemic, autoimmune, and inflammatory diseases, such as obesity, rheumatoid arthritis, and systemic lupus erythematosus.
Macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) is a key regulator of both atherosclerosis and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), yet factors leading to its overproduction remain unclear.
To investigate the mRNA level of glucocorticoid receptor Alfa (GRAlfa) and heat shock protein 90 (HSP90) in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) and the plasma protein level of macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and to analyze their association with glucocorticoid (GC) resistance.
To study the effect of the innate cytokine macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) on the susceptibility and severity of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) in a multinational population of 1,369 Caucasian and African American patients.
Minimal change disease and focal segmental glomerular sclerosis showed minimal or none expression of FcRn (1/8, 0/4 respectively) and not statistically difference from that of normal controls.
There was a higher production profile of TNF-Alfa and TSLP in nasal secretion in the patients with perennial allergic rhinitis and additional high sensitization to SEs.
We found that house dust mite (HDM) extract induced TSLP production by nasal epithelial cells, suggesting that TSLP may be involved in development of HDM-induced allergic rhinitis (AR).
We investigated changes in large aggregating (versican [VS]), basement membrane (heparan sulfate proteoglycan [HSPG]), and small (biglycan and fibromodulin) PGs during the development of BM-induced pulmonary fibrosis.
Fourteen patients aged 1 to 15 years with medulloblastoma (six patients), low-grade astrocytoma (four patients), and high-grade astrocytoma (four patients) were treated with carboplatin and etoposide (JET regimen).
Although predominantly present in hepatocytes, CYP2E1 has also been found in hematopoietic stem cells and subtypes of acute myeloid leukemia with unknown clinical significance except for the metabolism of anti-fungal drugs.
The aim of the present study was to analyze the roles of T lymphoma invasion and metastasis 1 (Tiam1) in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) progression and its correlation with clinicopathological features, including the survival of patients with NPC.
Rac1) and Tiam1-Rac1 pathway affects the migration and invasion of many tumors, such as nasopharyngeal carcinoma, breast cancer and retinoblastoma.
To explore biological aspects of Tiam1 gene expression in nasopharyngeal carcinoma cells.
Tiam1/C1199HA expression plasmids were transfected into nasopharyngeal carcinoma cells of C666-1 and CNE1 by lipofectamine2000.
Tiam1 expression correlates with the invasion and metastasis of nasopharyngeal carcinoma cells.
This study is designed to investigate the roles of Tiam1 and Rac1 in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC).
To investigate the relationship between the protein expression of T-lymphoma invasion and metastasis gene 1 (Tiam-1) and the biological behaviors of nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC).
To study the relation between T lymphoma invasion/metastasis1 (Tiam1) gene and nasopharyngeal carcinoma progression.
Average expression of the Tiam1 gene in nasopharyngeal carcinoma tissue (1.183 +/- 0.73) is higher than in normal nasopharyngeal tissue (0.87 +/- 0.45) (P &lt; 0.01).
Average expression of the Tiam1 gene in nasopharyngeal carcinoma tissue is higher than in normal nasopharyngeal tissue.
Our data suggest that the overexpression of the Tiam1 gene correlates invasion and metastasis of nasopharyngeal carcinoma.
In the present study, an initial staging FDG PET/CT showed intense FDG uptake in a patient with liver carcinosarcoma composed of hepatocellular carcinoma and rhabdomyosarcoma.
Workup of urinary retention after a previously treated squamous cell carcinoma of the prostate led to a transurethral prostate resection revealing carcinosarcoma of the prostate, which on F-FDG PET/CT demonstrated moderate to high avidity of this atypical prostate cancer, with partial obstruction of the urinary system and lung metastases.
In the present study, we report a case of gastric carcinosarcoma composed of rhabdomyosarcoma and adenocarcinoma on F-FDG PET/CT.
This is the rare reported case of esophageal carcinosarcoma that showed increased accumulation of tracer on FDG-PET.
We report a case of tissue-proven carcinosarcoma of the uterine corpus in a 65-year-old woman with elevated serum alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), whose 18F-FDG PET/CT showed a 10.3-cm mass in the uterus with uneven high FDG uptake.
Overexpression of meprin Beta is implicated in fibrosis, inflammatory diseases and cancers.
However, selective meprin Beta inhibition is crucial to reduce cancer metastasis and adverse effects in inflammation.
Moreover, meprin Beta cleaves amyloid precursor protein, thought to be involved in the progression of Alzheimer's disease.
Therefore, meprin Beta inhibitors are considered to be emerging therapeutics with paramount importance in the treatment of kidney failure, fibrosis, inflammatory bowel diseases and cancer.
Meprin (EC 3.4.24.18), an astacin-like metalloprotease, is expressed in the epithelium of the intestine and kidney tubules and has been related to cancer, but the mechanistic links are unknown.
The zinc endopeptidase meprin (EC 3.4.24.18) is expressed in brush border membranes of intestine and kidney tubules, intestinal leukocytes, and certain cancer cells, suggesting a role in epithelial differentiation and cell migration.
This investigation tested the hypothesis that variations in the structural or regulatory regions of the MEP1B gene are related to susceptibility to diabetic nephropathy in the Pima Indian population.
The present study demonstrates significant within-family association for SNPs in MEP1B gene with diabetic nephropathy.
The chemokine CCL20 is over-produced in epithelium of Crohn's disease [CD] patients and contributes to recruiting immune cells to inflamed gut.
The stage of liver cirrhosis correlated with an increase in plasma levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-6) and chemotactic chemokines involved in immune cell trafficking (MIP-3Alfa/CCL20).
Probiotic administration in patients with liver cirrhosis led to modulation of plasma levels of several molecules and compounds measured (MIP-3Alfa/CCL20, NO, big-endothelin, TXB2 and MPO).
Conversely, eight genes associated with carcinogenesis had higher expression in fibrosarcomas: FHL2, PLAGL1, FNBP1L, BAG2, HK1, CSK and Cox5A.
Analysis of microarray data showed elevated expression of MEST, PLAGL1, PEG3, DLK1, and IGF2 in various embryonal cancers, especially rhabdomyosarcoma, as compared to nonembryonal cancers and normal tissues.
Furthermore, siRNA-mediated knockdown of MEST, PLAGL1, PEG3, and IGF2 expression inhibited proliferation in Rh30 rhabdomyosarcoma cells.
This case is the first reported of a heterozygous C3 mutation associated with lupus nephritis and autoantibodies against complement alternative pathway proteins (Factor I, Factor B, C3 and Properdin).These autoantibodies cause activation of this pathway and this fact could explain that the tissue damage is restricted to the kidney.
Such deficiencies are caused by primary congenital immunodeficiency of a complement protein, properdin or mannose binding lectin, or are secondary to consumption of complement by systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) or membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis (MPGN).
Our results identify RefGenes as a powerful tool for the identification of valid RGs and suggest GUSB as the most reliable RG for KCs.
CDCA-3G (CDCA-3-glucuronide) and -24G, LCA-3G and -24G, and HDCA-6G and -24G were enzymatically formed by using microsomes from human liver, purified by liquid chromatography, digested with recombinant beta-glucuronidase, and quantified by liquid chromatography/electrospray ionization coupled to mass spectrometry (LC-ESI/MS).
Backgroud/Aims: Previous studies have shown that miR-501 is involved in the development of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) by promoting cell proliferation through CYLD.
Previous studies have shown that the micro-ribonucleic acid miR-501-5p is upregulated in hepatocellular carcinoma cells and tissues with high hepatitis B virus replication, and that miR-501 overexpression significantly promotes hepatitis B virus replication.
We further analysed a published microarray-based high-throughput dataset (NCBI/GEO/GSE36915) and found that miR-501-5p was upregulated in hepatocellular carcinoma tumour tissues.
We therefore investigated the possible function of miR-501-5p during the development of hepatocellular carcinoma.
Expression of miR-501-5p in human hepatocellular carcinoma specimens and cell lines was assessed, using real-time polymerase chain reaction.
MiR-501-5p was upregulated in hepatocellular carcinoma specimens and cell lines, and directly targeted the 3' untranslated region of CYLD.
MiR-501-5p upregulation corresponded with a downregulation of CYLD in the same tissues and cell lines, and overexpression of MiR-501-5p decreased CYLD expression, increased expression of cyclin D1 and c-myc and promoted the proliferation of hepatocellular carcinoma cells in vitro.
This study suggests that miR-501-5p may play an important role in the development of hepatocellular carcinoma by promoting cell proliferation, and indicates that miR-501-5p may represent a novel therapeutic target for hepatocellular carcinoma.
miR-501 expression was significantly up-regulated in hepatocellular carcinoma tissues, where HBV replication kept high.
Screening of celiac disease by anti-tissue transglutaminase antibody should be completed as a routine investigation in patients with iron-deficiency anemia.
Tissue transglutaminase antibodies were positive in 13 (8 %) patients with iron-deficiency anemia of obscure origin and 4 (2.5 %) in control group (p = 0.026) (odds ratio 3.42; 95 % confidence interval [CI]: 1.092-10.743).
Iron deficiency anemia and celiac disease were diagnosed on the basis of low serum ferritin, elevated serum level of IgA endomysial and tissue transglutaminase anti-bodies and histologic findings in small bowel biopsies.
These results suggest that in proliferating intestinal neoplasms, Bmi1- or Lgr5-positive cells represent a population of cancer stem cells, whereas Lgr5-positive cells also function as cells-of-origin for intestinal tumors.
After fluorescence activated cell sorting, real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and western blot confirmed Bmi-1 was differentially expressed in CD133 sorted laryngeal tumor cells.
Our data indicate that Bmi-1 expression is central to the tumorigenicity of CD133(+) cells, which functions as a pleiotropic regulator that maintains the viability and proliferative capacity of human laryngeal tumor.
Thus, we conclude that Bmi1 deficiency impairs the progression and maintenance of small intestinal tumors in a cell autonomous and highly Arf-dependent manner.
Here, we demonstrate that Id1 is strongly expressed in human and mouse liver tumors and in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cell lines, whereas its expression is very low or undetectable in normal liver tissues.
Together, our findings indicate a prominent novel role for Id1 in liver cancer cell metabolic adaptation.
In the liver cancer cell line HepG2, BMP9 triggers Smad1,5,8 phosphorylation and inhibitor of DNA binding 1 (Id1) expression up- regulation.
Cross-sectional study including all chronic hemodialysis patients with hepatitis C virus, in two public hemodialysis centers of Fez.
Consecutive patients with investigated ulcer or non-ulcer dyspepsia were prospectively enrolled in the Hassan II University Hospital of Fez.
Pendrin/NCC double KO (pendrin/NCC-dKO) mice display severe salt wasting under basal conditions and develop profound volume depletion, prerenal renal failure, and metabolic alkalosis and are growth retarded.
Further experiments used mice with blunted ENaC endocytosis and degradation (Liddle's syndrome) to explore the significance of pendrin-dependent changes in ENaC open probability.
In mouse models of Liddle's syndrome, pendrin gene ablation did not change ENaC subunit total protein abundance, subcellular distribution, or channel density, but markedly reduced channel open probability.
In a mouse model of Liddle's syndrome, however, pendrin gene ablation reduces channel activity mainly through changes in open probability.
We propose that the combined inhibition of pendrin and NCC can provide a strong diuretic regimen without causing hypokalemia for patients with fluid overload, including patients with congestive heart failure, nephrotic syndrome, diuretic resistance, or generalized edema.
We propose that pharmacologic inhibition of pendrin and NCC can provide a novel and strong diuretic regimen for patients with fluid overload, including those with congestive heart failure, nephrotic syndrome or renal failure.
Furthermore, experimental validation was carried out with MIP-1Beta-induced U937 cell model and collagen induced arthritis (CIA) rat model.
ROMK knockout mice (KO) show a similar phenotype to Bartter's syndrome of salt wasting and dehydration due to reduced Na-2Cl-K-cotransporter activity but not in ROMK1 KO.
Mutations in the ROMK1 potassium channel gene (KCNJ1) cause antenatal/neonatal Bartter syndrome type II (aBS II), a renal disorder that begins in utero, accounting for the polyhydramnios and premature delivery that is typical in affected infants, who develop massive renal salt wasting, hypokalaemic metabolic alkalosis, secondary hyperreninaemic hyperaldosteronism, hypercalciuria and nephrocalcinosis.
Type II Bartter syndrome is caused by mutations in the renal outer medullary potassium (ROMK) channel, but the molecular mechanisms underlying this disease are poorly defined.
These findings indicate that the underlying pathology for at least a subset of patients with type II Bartter syndrome is linked to the ERAD pathway and that future therapeutic strategies should focus on correcting deficiencies in ROMK folding.
This idea is supported by the phenotype of antenatal Bartter's syndrome type II associated with loss-of-function mutations in the human ROMK channel, as well as, by cardiovascular studies of heterozygous carriers of channel mutations associated with type II Bartter's syndrome.
In addition, Bartter's syndrome type II features are manifested on exposure to ROMK inhibitors.
Romk knock-out mice show a similar phenotype to Bartter syndrome of salt wasting and dehydration due to reduced Na-K-2Cl-cotransporter activity.
KCNJ1 variation is associated with multiple diseases, such as antenatal Bartter syndrome and diabetes.
The identification of human mutations suggests that MPDZ plays a role in human retinal disease, but the precise nature of this role remains to be determined.
We aimed to investigate the biological role of miR-367 in uveal melanoma cell growth and migration, and the underlying mechanism responsible.
Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction was performed to evaluate miR-367 expression in uveal melanoma tissue samples and cell lines.
In addition, the role of PTEN in miR-367-mediated uveal melanoma cell growth and migration was evaluated.
miR-367 was significantly upregulated in uveal melanoma cells and tissue samples (both P &lt; 0.01).
More importantly, co-transfection with a PTEN construct lacking the 3'-untranslated region mitigated miR-367 mimic-induced promotion of uveal melanoma cell proliferation and migration.
In summary, miR-367 was found to be upregulated in this malignancy, and may promote uveal melanoma cell proliferation and migration, at least in part by regulating PTEN.
We further constructed an immunocompetent mouse model of acute hepatitis B viral infection to demonstrate that LSECtin significantly delayed the clearance of hepatitis B virus from blood and infected hepatocytes by limiting the frequency of hepatitis B virus-specific IFN-Gamma-producing cells.
Consistent with this function, LSECtin was upregulated in the liver of mouse models of viral hepatitis.
Metabolomic analysis revealed that alpha-naphthyl isothiocyanate (ANIT)-induced intrahepatic cholestasis resulted in the accumulation of serum long-chain acylcarnitines and triglyceride, and the reduced expression of four fatty acid Beta-oxidation (Beta-FAO) relevant genes (Cpt1b, Cpt2, Mcad and Hadha), indicating the disruption of Beta-FAO.
Furthermore, re-addition of IgA or IgM to the Igs-depleted corona reinstated the low adhesion of PLGA VTCs, as evidenced by ~40-70% reduction relative to particles with an Igs-deficient corona.
Specific antibody deficiency (SAD) is a primary immunodeficiency disease characterized by normal immunoglobulins (Igs), IgA, IgM, total IgG, and IgG subclass levels, but with recurrent infection and diminished antibody responses to polysaccharide antigens following vaccination.
GCB IgM and IgT have the prototypical structure when compared to other fish Igs.
Another major factor in SPRY3 repression is late replication; the inactive X and Y alleles of SPRY3 have delayed replication relative to the active X allele, even in ICF syndrome cells where the closely linked SYBL1 gene is reactivated and advanced in replication.
In ICF syndrome, a human disease affecting DNA methylation, SYBL1 escapes from silencing and this correlates with altered patterns of histone methylation and acetylation.
Pseudoachondroplasia (PSACH) is an autosomal dominant osteochondrodysplasia caused by mutations in the gene encoding cartilage oligomeric matrix protein (COMP).
GAC repeat expansion from five to seven in the exonic region of the gene for cartilage oligomeric matrix protein (COMP) leads to pseudoachondroplasia, a skeletal abnormality.
The phenotypic spectrum associated with heterozygous mutations in cartilage oligomeric matrix protein gene (COMP) range from a mild form of multiple epiphyseal dysplasia (MED) to pseudoachondroplasia (PSACH).
Pseudoachondroplasia (PSACH), a severe short-limbed dwarfing condition, is associated with life-long joint pain and early onset osteoarthritis.
Mutations in cartilage oligomeric matrix protein cause pseudoachondroplasia, a severe disproportionate short stature disorder.
We demonstrate delivery of human cartilage oligomeric matrix protein-specific antisense oligonucleotides to cartilage and reduction of cartilage oligomeric matrix protein expression, which largely alleviates pseudoachondroplasia growth plate chondrocyte pathology.
We report the case of a 40-year-old woman with pseudoachondroplasia (PSACH), with a heterozygous mutation (c.806A &gt; G, p.Asp269Gly) located in the Type 3 repeats domain of the cartilage oligomeric matrix protein gene, who complained of the unusual symptom of painful locking of the wrist.
Pseudoachondroplasia (PSACH; MIM no.
Pseudoachondroplasia (PSACH) is a rare and severe genetic disease; therefore, an accurate molecular diagnosis is essential for appropriate disease treatment and family planning.
To uncover the genetic associations with Ebstein anomaly, we have searched chromosomal imbalances using standard cytogenetic and array-CGH analysis, and single gene conditions associated with syndromic Ebstein anomaly (with extracardiac anomalies), and screened GATA4 and NKX2.5 mutations in nonsyndromic patients (without extracardiac anomalies).
Candidate genes include the GATA4 gene (in patients with del 8p23.1), NKX2.5 (based on published patients with isolated Ebstein anomaly) and a hypothetical gene in patients with del 1p36).
In this study, we evaluated the presence and frequency of mutations in the NKX2.5 gene on 159 unrelated patients with a diverse range of non-syndromic congenital heart defects (conotruncal anomalies, septal defects, left-sided lesions, right-sided lesions, patent ductus arteriosus and Ebstein's anomaly).
The current data suggest that haploinsufficiency of NKX2-5 cause Ebstein anomaly and support previous results showing that NKX2-5 mutations cause ASD and AV conduction defect.
Heterozygous mutation of human CSX/NKX2.5 has been associated with various congenital heart diseases such as atrial septal defect (ASD), ventricular septal defect, tetralogy of Fallot, and tricuspid valve abnormalities, including Ebstein's anomaly.
We found that patients with lung squamous cell carcinoma with low p53 acetylation and SIRT1 expression mostly showed low HIC1 expression, confirming deregulation of HIC1-SIRT1-p53 circular loop in the clinical model.
Distinct status of p53 acetylation/deacetylation and HIC1 alteration mechanism result from different SIRT1-DBC1 control and epigenetic alteration in lung squamous cell carcinoma and lung adenocarcinoma.
We investigated promoter hypermethylation of six genes, p16, APC, HIC-1, death-associated protein kinase (DAPK), O(6)-methylguanine-DNA-methyltransferase (MGMT), and E-cadherin, in uterine cervical carcinoma from 53 patients including 31 cases of squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) and 22 cases of adenocarcinoma (AC).
The aim of this study was to evaluate the influence of PNPLA3 p.I148M and APOC3 rs2854116 and rs2854117 polymorphisms on the clinical and histological presentation of chronic hepatitis C in an Italian population and their relationship with viral and anthropometric parameters.
To explore the gene polymorphisms of ApoAI-75 Msp1, ApoB Msp1, ApoCIII Sst1, LRP5, and ApoE genotypes in two pairs of semi different modes of hepatitis B for HBV markers.
There was association between gene polymorphisms of ApoAI-75Msp1 and ApoE and different modes of two pairs of semi-hepatitis B (P &lt; 0.05), while there wasn't any association between gene polymorphisms of ApoB-Msp1, ApoCIII-Sst1, LRP5 and different modes of two pairs of semi-hepatitis B (P &gt; 0.05).
AQP8 expression was highest in CIN2-3 (91.7%), but levels in cervical carcinoma were also higher than in mild cervicitis.
Connective tissue abnormalities are not generally recognised as a part of NF1 microdeletion syndrome, but mitral valve prolapse, joint laxity, and/or soft skin on the palms have been reported in a few patients.
Thus, our present work links ApoE and PPP2R5E expression to a reduction in the PP2A catalytic activity that has implications for Alzheimer's disease.
Quantification of circulating fetal and total cell-free DNA (cfDNA) and soluble human leucocyte antigen (HLAG) in gestational hypertension and pre-eclampsia.
Soluble HLAG levels were lower in pre-eclamptics than controls and gestational hypertension (p &lt; 0.05).
Circulating fetal and total cfDNA were increased, while soluble HLAG was decreased in pre-eclampsia.
The effect of HLA-G 14 bp Ins/Del polymorphism (rs371194629) on the risk of preeclampsia has been assessed in several populations, yet the results are still conflicting.
This well-powered study clearly demonstrates that the maternal HLA-G 14-bp Ins/Del polymorphism is not associated with preeclampsia risk.
Ten genes (ABI3BP, C7, HLA-G, IL2RB, KRBOX1, LRRC15, METTL7B, MPP5, RFLNB and SLC20A) had a &gt;=+/-1 fold expression difference in severe early-onset preeclampsia group compared to early controls.
There were 362 genes that had a &gt;=+/-1 fold expression difference in severe early-onset preeclampsia group compared to late-onset preeclampsia group including ABI3BP, C7, HLA-G and IL2RB.
ABI3BP, C7, HLA-G and IL2RB might contribute to the development of early form of severe preeclampsia.
168 healthy normal weight women and 59 overweight/obese women; to avoid the effect of preeclampsia on sHLA-G concentrations, cases were further divided in two groups: 42 with normotensive pregnancy and 17 who developed preeclampsia.
Maternal concentrations of sHLA-G in the two trimesters and before delivery were significantly lower among subjects who developed preeclampsia than in controls (p&lt;0.001) or in obese subjects with normotensive pregnancies (p&lt;0.001).
Obesity influences maternal and fetal sHLA-G concentrations during pregnancy, to optimize the reproductive success, while preeclampsia impairs the mother-offspring antinflammatory response.
Our results showed that the content of GABA and the expression of GABAA and GABAC receptors of retina were up-regulated during the development of myopia, and this up-regulation was inhibited by applying EA to Hegu (LI4) and Taiyang (EX-HN5) acupoints.
Seventeen molecules, including transcription factor E2F, T-cell-specific transcription factor, Src (known as "proto-oncogene tyrosine-protein kinase of sarcoma"), interferon regulatory factor 1, thymidylate synthase, cyclin B, cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) 4, CDK, caspase-1, vitamin D receptor, histone deacetylase, MAPK/ERK kinase, bcl-2-associated X protein, runt-related transcription factor 1, PR domain zinc finger protein 1, platelet-derived growth factor receptor, and interleukin 1, were identified as candidate molecules.
To study the effect of B lymphocyte-induced mature protein-1(Blimp1) expression in bone marrow mononuclear cells on the prognosis of patients with multiple myeloma.
Bcl6 (B-cell lymphoma 6) is a transcriptional repressor and critical mediator of the germinal center reaction during a T-cell-dependent antibody response, where it enables somatic hypermutation of immunoglobulin genes and inhibits terminal differentiation via repression of Blimp1.
We report that a SEC component, the Eleven -nineteen Lysine-rich leukemia (ELL) family member 3 (ELL3) is dynamically up-regulated in mature and activated human B cells followed by suppression as B cells transition to plasma cells in part mediated by the transcription repressor PRDM1.
The expression of PR domain zinc finger protein 1 (Blimp1) and B-cell lymphoma 6 (Bcl6) were analyzed by western blotting.
These results indicated that Mda-7/IL-24 could induce terminal differentiation of B lymphoma cells by regulating the expression of Blimp1 and Bcl6 via altering the P38 MAPK signaling pathway, suggesting that Mda-7/IL-24 may therefore be a potential differentiation therapeutic agent to be applied in clinical treatment of B cell lymphoma.
B lymphocyte-induced maturation protein-1 (Blimp-1) ensures B-cell differentiation into the plasma cell stage, and its instability constitutes a crucial oncogenic element in certain aggressive cases of activated B cell-like diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (ABC-DLBCL).
Mechanistically, whereas wild-type Blimp-1 metabolism is triggered in the nucleus through PML-mediated sumoylation, the degradation of lymphoma-associated mutants is accelerated by subversion of this pathway to Hrd1-mediated cytoplasmic sequestration and ubiquitination.
Therefore, HSP70-Hrd1 axis represents a potential therapeutic target for restoring the oncorepressor activity of unstable lymphoma-associated Blimp-1 mutants.The transcriptional repressor Blimp-1 has an important role in B-cell differentiation.
Here the authors show that lymphoma-associated Blimp-1 mutants are selectively recognized by HSP70-Hrd1, which leads to their accelerated degradation and propose HSP70 inhibition as a therapeutic approach for certain lymphomas.
These findings support a model in which upregulation of BLIMP1 links microenvironmental cues to a metastatic stem cell character.Significance: PDAC is an almost uniformly lethal cancer, largely due to its tendency for metastasis.
Expression of several cytokines and chemokines were significantly increased in plasma from EV71-infected patients compared to healthy controls, which further indicated that: (1) GM-CSF, MIP-1Beta, IL-2, IL-33, and IL-23 secretion was elevated in patients who rapidly developed disease and presented with uncomplicated neurological damage; (2) G-CSF and MCP-1 were distinguishably secreted in EV71 infected very severe patients presenting with acute respiratory failure; (3) IP-10, MCP-1, IL-6, IL-8, and G-CSF levels were much higher in cerebrospinal fluid than in plasma from patients with neurological damage; (4) FACS analysis revealed that the frequency of CD19(+)HLADR(+) mature B cells dynamically changed over time during the course of hospitalization and was accompanied by dramatically increased EV71-specific antibodies.
Using an immunoblotting assay (ImBA), several immuno-crossreactive antigenic components (ImCRAC-myc) have been identified in the whole sonicates of M. bovis-BCG, and M. tuberculosis (Mtb) and M. leprae (ML) whereby the sera of 100% lepromatous leprosy (L-Lep) reacted to 29/33 KD doublet and that of 100% tuberculoid leprosy (T-Lep) reacted to 64 KD bands.
These two complement effectors, C5a and C5b-9, generated from C5 cleavage, are key components of the complement system responsible for propagating and/or initiating pathology in different diseases, including paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria, rheumatoid arthritis, ischemia-reperfusion injuries and neurodegenerative diseases.
Our findings further suggest that Rab1A is a valuable biomarker for prognosis and personalized mTORC1-targeted therapy in liver cancer.
They should also be of importance in the knowledge of inherited genetic deficiencies, such as glycogen storage disease type 1 (Von Gierke disease) and the Fanconi-Bickel and glucose-galactose malabsorption syndromes.
MicroRNA-224 (miR-224) is one of the most commonly up-regulated microRNAs in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), which affects crucial cellular processes such as apoptosis and cell proliferation.
Examples include glycogen in the case of Pompe disease, glycosaminoglycans in the case of the mucopolysaccharidoses, glycoproteins in the cases of the oligosaccharidoses, and sphingolipids in the cases of Niemann-Pick disease types A and B, Gaucher disease, Tay-Sachs disease, Krabbe disease, and metachromatic leukodystrophy.
Examples include imiglucerase, taliglucerase and velaglucerase for Gaucher disease, laronidase for Hurler disease, idursulfase for Hunter disease, elosulfase for Morquio disease, galsulfase for Maroteaux-Lamy disease, alglucosidase alfa for Pompe disease, and agalsidase alfa and beta for Fabry disease.
The advent of treatment options for some of these disorders has led to newborn screening pilot studies, and ultimately to the addition of Pompe disease and Hurler disease to the Recommended Uniform Screening Panel (RUSP) in 2015 and 2016, respectively.
We report an informatics solution proven to minimize these issues.MethodsThe Kentucky Department for Public Health outsourced testing for mucopolysaccharidosis type I (MPS I) and Pompe disease, conditions recently added to the recommended uniform screening panel, plus Krabbe disease, which was added by legislative mandate.
Testing by tandem mass spectrometry was integrated with multivariate pattern recognition software (Collaborative Laboratory Integrated Reports), which is freely available to newborn screening programs for selection of cases for which a biochemical second-tier test is needed.ResultsOf five presumptive positive cases, one was affected with infantile Krabbe disease, two with Pompe disease, and one with MPS I.
Pompe disease, a rare lysosomal storage disease caused by deficiency of the lysosomal acid Alfa-glucosidase (GAA), is characterized by glycogen accumulation, triggering severe secondary cellular damage and resulting in progressive motor handicap and premature death.
Pompe disease is a lysosomal storage disorder caused by acid-Alfa-glucosidase (GAA) deficiency, leading to glycogen storage.
Although RUFY3 (RUN and FYVE domain containing 3)/SINGAR1 (single axon-related1)/RIPX (Rap2 interacting protein X) has an important role in neuronal development, its pathophysiologic role and relevance to cancer are still largely unknown.
The purpose of this study was to elucidate the molecular mechanisms by which RUFY3 involves in gastric cancer cell migration and invasion.
Here, our data show that overexpression of RUFY3 leads to the formation of F-actin-enriched protrusive structures at the cell periphery and induces gastric cancer cell migration.
Furthermore, P21-activated kinase-1 (PAK1) interacts with RUFY3, and promotes RUFY3 expression and RUFY3-induced gastric cancer cell migration; inhibition of PAK1 attenuates RUFY3-induced SGC-7901 cell migration and invasion.
Strikingly, we found significant upregulation of RUFY3 in gastric cancer samples with invasive carcinoma at pathologic TNM III and TNM IV stages, compared with their non-tumor counterparts.
Moreover, an obvious positive correlation was observed between the protein expression of RUFY3 and PAK1 in 40 pairs of gastric cancer samples.
Therefore, these findings provide important evidence that PAK1 can positively regulate RUFY3 expression, which contribute to the metastatic potential of gastric cancer cells, maybe blocking PAK1-RUFY3 signaling would become a potential metastasis therapeutic strategy for gastric cancer.
After mRNA transcription of meningioma (WHO grade I-III) and meningeal tissue from three different experimental sample types (fresh tissue, primary cell cultures and FFPE tissue), 13 candidate reference genes (ACTB, B2M, HPRT, VIM, GAPDH, YWHAZ, EIF4A2, MUC1, ATP5B, GNB2L, TUBB, CYC1, RPL13A) were chosen for quantitative expression analysis.
YAP and 14-3-3Zeta expression exhibited a negative correlation in gastric cancer (GC) tissues.
Remarkably, the expression of YWHAZ is inversely correlated with the level of miR-451 in human breast cancer samples.
To define the functional impact of 14-3-3Zeta proteasomal binding in myeloma cells, silencing and overexpression experiments are performed.
We find that downregulation of 14-3-3Zeta impairs myeloma cell growth and confers resistance to clinically used proteasome inhibitors.
In a large cohort of newly diagnosed myeloma patients, elevated expression of 14-3-3Zeta is associated with high risk myeloma genetic subtypes and worse prognosis overall.
Our work demonstrates the important role of 14-3-3Zeta in regulating proteasome function, myeloma cell growth and sensitivity to therapeutics, and suggests regulation of 14-3-3Zeta as a new approach in myeloma therapy.Leukemia advance online publication, 17 October 2017; doi:10.1038/leu.2017.288.
Among them, Rab-GDIBeta, aldehyde dehydrogenase 2 (ALDH2) and 14-3-3 zeta/delta were important since they were previously reported to be associated with cancer and their expression levels were found to be lower in BCG-treated group in comparison to the non-treated group.
Overexpression of MUC1 is found to induce epithelial-mesenchymal transition and promote metastasis of lung cancer cells, while knockdown of 14-3-3Zeta can completely abolish the oncogenic function of MUC1.Furthermore, we unraveled a novel mechanism that 14-3-3Zeta activates NF-KB signaling pathway, and therefore enhanced MUC1/NF-KB feedback loop to upregulate MUC1 expression.
14-3-3Zeta and MUC1 is a promising prognostic biomarker for lung cancer patients and therapeutic targeting of 14-3-3Zeta and MUC1 may be a potential treatment option for patients with LAC.
14-3-3Zeta expression is amplified in over 40% breast cancer patients and is associated with a poor prognosis.
Various in vitro and xenograft models have suggested that attenuating 14-3-3Zeta expression may provide therapeutic benefits but there has been no study looking at tumor onset and metastasis in breast cancer mouse models with a targeted deletion of 14-3-3Zeta.
We generated a 14-3-3Zeta knockout mouse model to characterize the role of 14-3-3Zeta in breast cancer progression.
Here, we show that a single Arginine (R) to Glycine (G) mutation at position 76 in the refp17 backbone (p17R76G), as in the S75X variant, is per se sufficient to confer a B-cell clonogenic potential to the viral protein and modulate, through activation of the PTEN/PI3K/Akt signaling pathway, different molecules involved in apoptosis inhibition (CASP-9, CASP-7, DFF-45, NPM, YWHAZ, Src, PAX2, MAPK8), cell cycle promotion and cancer progression (CDK1, CDK2, CDK8, CHEK1, CHEK2, GSK-3 beta, NPM, PAK1, PP2C-alpha).
The 14-3-3Zeta protein acts as a molecular switch in regulating the TGF-Beta pathway, which alters from a tumor suppressor in the early stage of breast cancer to a promoter of metastasis in the late stage.
This change is due to the binding of 14-3-3Zeta with YAP1 and Beta-TRCP in premalignant and cancer cells, respectively.
Owing to this inappropriate role of 14-3-3Zeta when involved in cancer and metastasis, we predicted that Gln15, Glu17, Tyr211, and Gln219 are hotspot residues of 14-3-3Zeta during its interaction with YAP1 protein.
Targeting these residues of 14-3-3Zeta can prevent cancer and metastasis caused by malfunctioning of the TGF-Beta pathway.
The objective of this study was to evaluate the accuracy of non-invasive detection of fetal trisomy 18 using the unmethylated-maspin (U-maspin) gene as a cell-free fetal DNA marker and the methylated-maspin (M-maspin) gene as a cell-free total DNA marker in the first trimester of pregnancy.
Median U-maspin concentrations were significantly elevated in women with trisomy 18 fetuses compared with controls (27.2 vs. 6.7 copies/mL; P&lt;0.001).
Median M-maspin concentrations were also significantly higher in women with trisomy 18 fetuses than in controls (96.9 vs. 19.5 copies/mL, P&lt;0.001).
The specificities of U-maspin and M-maspin concentrations for non-invasive fetal trisomy 18 detection were 96.4% and 74.5%, respectively, with a sensitivity of 90.9%.
Our results suggest that U-maspin and M-maspin concentrations may be useful as potential biomarkers for non-invasive detection of fetal trisomy 18 in the first trimester of pregnancy, irrespective of the sex and genetic variations of the fetus.
Recently, the SERPINB5 gene on chromosome 18 was shown to exhibit different DNA-methylation patterns in the placenta and maternal blood cells, and the allelic ratio for placenta-derived hypomethylated SERPINB5 in maternal plasma was further shown to be useful for noninvasive detection of fetal trisomy 18.
Further studies can shed light on the physiological importance of actin filament aggregation with the peptides of thymopoietin, the systematic release of which from the thymus produces the phenomena characteristic for the serious neuromuscular disease myasthenia gravis.
The appearance of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) as well as thymopoietin (TP3) treatment in a patient who has undergone thymectomy because of myasthenia gravis (MG) is described.
M2 (45Kd protein) was synthesized in thymocytes treated with thymopoietin, in cells from a patient with myasthenia gravis, and in a human T cell line.
The effect of thymopoietin penta- (TP-5), tetra-(TP-4), and tripeptides (TP-3) was studied on the depressed lectin-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (LDCC) against adherent HEp-2 target cells by peripheral blood mononuclear cells from patients with active systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).
We demonstrated that the E6 proteins of two beta-human papillomaviruses (HPV14 and HPV21) associated with epidermodysplasia verruciformis also interacted with FOXK1/K2 through a motif similar to that of E1A.
Moreover, induction of oncostatin M was detected in cancer-stimulated ASCs, whereas the downstream S100A7 binding proteins/receptor for advanced glycation endproducts were significantly upregulated in correspondence with S100A7 expression in breast cancer cells after coculture with ASCs.
We identified 39 significantly deregulated miRNAs, and the integration between miRNA and mRNA data revealed the importance of immune-related pathways, particularly the Oncostatin M (OSM) signaling, associated with mesenchymal-like breast cancer cells.
OSM levels correlated with genes involved in the inflammatory response, epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), and epidermal growth factor (EGF) signaling in human estrogen receptor (ER)-negative/human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-negative breast cancer.
The identification of the OSM inflammatory pathway as an important mediator of EMT in triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) may provide a novel potential opportunity to improve therapeutic strategies.
Specifically, OSM, expressed by CD45(+) leucocytes in the stromal vascular fraction, induced phosphorylation of STAT3 (pSTAT3-) Y705 and S727 in breast cancer cells and transcription of several STAT3-dependent genes, including S100 family members S100A7, S100A8, and S100A9.
Our work reveals the potential of novel therapeutic strategies targeting the OSM and STAT3 axis in patients with breast cancer harboring nuclear pSTAT3-Y705.
Here, we show that hypoxia-primed cancer cells chemoattract and polarize macrophages to pro-angiogenic M2-polarized subtype via Eotaxin and Oncostatin M. Concordantly, hypoxic regions of human breast-cancer specimen exhibited elevated Eotaxin and Oncostatin M levels with concurrently elevated M2-macrophage content.
Blockade of Eotaxin/Oncostatin M not only prevented hypoxic breast-cancer cells from recruiting and polarizing macrophages towards an M2-polarized phenotype and retarded tumor progression in 4T1/BALB/c-syngenic-mice-model of breast-cancer but also enhanced the efficacy of anti-angiogenic Bevacizumab.
HB-EGF and OSM are co-expressed by TAM in breast carcinoma patients, and plasma levels of both ligands correlate strongly.
The purpose of this study was to evaluate the safety and efficacy of Thymosin Beta4 eye drops (RGN-259) as a novel therapy for severe dry eye disease (including that associated with graft vs. host disease).
The purpose of this manuscript is to review the clinical entity of dry eye syndrome (DES) and to provide a scientific basis and rationale for the usage of thymosin beta 4 (TBeta4) as a novel therapy for DES.
The present study was conducted to analyze CD39 expression in T cells and B-CLL cells to evaluate its impact on the clinical course of patients with B-CLL and correlate its levels with well-established risk factors.
Overall, our data indicate that T-cell CD39 expression may identify subsets of patients with B-CLL with an unfavorable clinical outcome.
This paper focuses on the impact of ectonucleotidases, in particular, NTPDase1/CD39 and ecto-5'-nucleotidase/CD73, on allograft rejection, acute GvHD, and graft-versus-leukemia effect, and on possible clinical implications for the modulation of purinergic signalling after transplantation.
A population of CCR7(+)CD39(+) T(regs) was significantly associated with chronic lymphocytic leukemia.
We have tested whether the expression of CD39 and CD73 by chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) cells activates an adenosinergic axis affecting growth and survival.
Transcriptional and posttranscriptional levels of CaMKIIin tissue samples and MMP2, MMP9 and TIMP-1 expression in the human colon cancer cell line HCT116 were assessed by qRT-PCR and western blot.
Thus, these findings suggested that TUC.338 acts as a novel oncogene by targeting the TIMP-1 gene thus promoting colorectal cancer cell migration and invasion.
We analyzed the expression of TIMP1 in both public database (Oncomine and TCGA) and 94 cases of primary colon cancer and matched normal colon tissue specimens.
Cox proportional hazards model showed that TIMP1 was an independent prognostic indicator of disease-free survival (HR = 2.603, 95 % CI: 1.115-6.077, p = 0.027) and overall survival (HR = 2.907, 95 % CI: 1.254-6.737, p = 0.013) for patients with colon cancer.
TIMP1 might play an important role in promoting tumorigenesis and metastasis of human colon cancer and function as a potential prognostic indicator for colon cancer.
According to the WHO diagnosis criteria 2016 standard diagnostic procedure in myeloproliferative neoplasms includes bone marrow biopsy and the detection of one of the acquired and typical MPN mutations in the JAK2, MPL or CALR gene.In contrast, patients with thrombocytopenia more often suffer from bleeding complications, however, in antiphospholipid syndrome or thrombotic microangiopathy (TMA) thrombotic events occur in spite of a low platelet count.
Myeloproliferative disease burden in each of the JAK2, CALR and MPL MPNs is best reflected by the degree of anemia, splenomegaly, mutation allele burden, bone marrow cellularity and myelofibrosis.
The key component of the Beta-catenin destruction complex glycogen synthase kinase 3Beta (GSK-3Beta), one of the major target for BIO, polyubiquitination and degradation of the main oncoprotein Beta-catenin in colorectal cancer (CRC).
STAG1 inactivation inhibits the proliferation of STAG2 mutated but not wild-type bladder cancer and Ewing sarcoma cell lines.
Restoration of STAG2 expression in a mutated bladder cancer model alleviates the dependency on STAG1.
However, the effect of STAG2 on the bladder cancer cell proliferation, migration, and invasion has not yet been fully clarified.
Collectively, these data suggest that STAG2 acts as a tumor suppressor gene in bladder cancer and may be a potential therapeutic target in BC.
Recent whole-genome sequencing studies have identified that genetic alterations of stag2 are common in bladder cancer (BC).
Our findings indicate that loss of STAG2 function plays a more important role in non-invasive than that in muscle-invasive bladder cancer and suggest that cohesin complex-independent functions are likely to be important in these cases.
Loss of expression was often observed in chromosomally stable tumors, and STAG2 knockdown in bladder cancer cells did not increase aneuploidy.
Our studies suggest that STAG2 has a role in controlling chromosome number but not the proliferation of bladder cancer cells.
These findings identify STAG2 as one of the most commonly mutated genes in bladder cancer.
To analyze the cellular antigens of human B-cell lineage, a monoclonal antibody, NU-B1, was raised using the acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) cell line NALM-16 as the immunogen.
In a clinical study, NU-B1 reacted specifically with leukemias/lymphomas of B-cell lineage: all 43 cases of ALL including common ALL and biphenotypic leukemia, all 4 cases of B-cell ALL, 6/7 B-cell type malignant lymphomas and 2/4 B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemias.
As Imeglimin did show a full prevention of Beta-cell apoptosis, and since angiopathy represents a major complication of diabetes, we studied Imeglimin protective effects on hyperglycemia-induced death of human endothelial cells (HMEC-1).
We conclude that Imeglimin prevents hyperglycemia-induced cell death in HMEC-1 through inhibition of PTP opening without inhibiting mitochondrial respiration nor affecting cellular energy status.
Simulating the presence of hyperglycemia, hypercholesterolemia and hypertension, this in vitro study investigated the effect of glucose, angiotensin II, and nLDL treatments on IL-6, ET-1 and NO in HMEC-1.
HMEC-1 cells (a human microvascular endothelial cell line) were exposed to control (5 mM), 30 mM (high), fluctuating (5/30 mM) and 11.2 mM glucose (approximate glycaemic criteria for the diagnosis of diabetes mellitus) for 72 h. Cells were assessed for TLR2, 4, high mobility group box -1 (HMGB1), NF-KB, monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1), interleukin-8 (IL-8), intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) and vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1).
In an exploratory pilot study; blood and ascitic fluid from 34 patients with liver cirrhosis of different etiology were analyzed for pattern recognition molecules (ficolin-1, ficolin-2, ficolin-3 and MBL) and complement proteins (C4 and C3).
Ficolin-1, ficolin-2, MBL, C4 and C3 in ascitic fluid and ficolin-1, C4 and C3 in blood were significantly (p = .001-.027) lower in patients with Child-Pugh stage C (n = 16, 47%) compared to Child-Pugh stage B cirrhosis (n = 18, 53%).
Low C4 and C3 in serum and C3 and ficolin-1 in ascitic fluid are risk factors for all-cause mortality or liver transplantation independently of liver function in patients with cirrhosis and ascites.
The purpose of current study was to determine the association of three complement activators, namely Pentraxin-3 (PTX3),M-ficolin, and Surfactant protein A (SPA) with the severity of ischemic stroke.
The correlation of serum level of PTX3, M-ficolin, and SPA with stroke severity was 0.732, 0.736, and 0.731, respectively.
There is a strong association between serum levels of PTX3, M-ficolin, and SPA with the severity of ischemic stroke.
Various immunological and inflammatory biomarkers have been associated with cancer, including soluble urokinase plasminogen activator receptor (suPAR) and the pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) pentraxin-3, mannose-binding lectin, ficolin-1, ficolin-2 and ficolin-3.
Ficolin-1-3, MBL and pentraxin-3 were not associated with cancer.
Symptomatic patients experiencing a transient ischemic attack had lower plasma levels of ficolin-1.
Among the genes in the turquoise module, COL5A2 (collagen, type V, alpha 2) could be regulated by PBX (pre-B-cell leukemia homeobox 1)1/2 and HOXB1(homeobox B1) transcription factors to be involved in the focal adhesion pathway; CENP-E (centromere protein E, 312kDa) by E2F4 (E2F transcription factor 4, p107/p130-binding); MYCN (v-myc myelocytomatosis viral related oncogene, neuroblastoma derived [avian]) by PAX5 (paired box 5); and BCL-2 (B-cell CLL/ lymphoma 2) and IGFBP-6 (insulin-like growth factor binding protein 6) by GLI1.
The PAX5 gene is involved in medulloblastoma, non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder, neuroblastoma, breast cancer and SCC.
Screening of neuroblastoma cell lines revealed PAX5 expression in a malignant subset of neuroblastoma cells, so-called 'N-type' cells, but not in the more benign 'S-type' neuroblastoma cells.
Taken together we propose PAX5 as an important factor for the maintenance of the proliferative and tumorigenic phenotype of neuroblastoma.
Pancreatitis and adverse events consistent with sphincter of Oddi spasm were uncommon.
Expert commentary: The efficacy and safety of eluxadoline in treating bowel habit alterations and pain, both in the short and long-term, make the drug a welcome addition to our therapeutic alternatives in IBS-D. Its positioning in any IBS algorithm will depend on the 'real world' prevalence of the small risk of sphincter of Oddi spasm and mild pancreatitis.
It is caused by vasospasm, but the mechanism of spasm is unknown but has been linked with hyperthyroidism in some studies.
Overall, the prognosis for hyperthyroidism-associated coronary vasospasm is good.
We describe a very rare case of an acute myocardial infarction in a 27-year-old female, at 9 weeks of gestation due to right coronary artery spasm secondary to gestational hyperthyroidism with free thyroxine of 7.7 ng/dL and TSH &lt;0.07 IU/L.
Adrenal haemorrhage is a rare cause of hypoadrenalism, and thus requires prompt diagnosis and management to prevent death from primary adrenocortical insufficiency.Mechanisms of adrenal haemorrhage include reduced adrenal vascular bed capillary resistance, adrenal vein thrombosis, catecholamine-related increased adrenal blood flow and adrenal vein spasm.Standard diagnostic assessment is a non-contrast CT abdomen.Intravenous hydrocortisone and intravenous substitution of fluids are the initial management.A formal diagnosis of primary adrenal insufficiency should never delay treatment, but should be made afterwards.
Results: The predominant features of the hypoparathyroidism were carpopedal spasm (89.3%, 108/121) and seizures (66.1%, 84/127).
Conclusions: Carpopedal spasm and seizures were the main manifestations of childhood- and adolescent- onset hypoparathyroidism.
Eluxadoline was associated with increased occurrence of sphincter of Oddi spasm and biliary pancreatitis.
In this single-centre prospective study, blood samples for analysis of CTCs were obtained from 102 patients with Stage I-IIIA NSCLC both before (CTC1) and 1 month after (CTC2) radical resection.
Recent studies have shown that the human CTC1/STN1/TEN1 complex (CST) plays a multi-faceted role in telomere maintenance in telomerase-expressing cancer cells.
Using case-control comparisons, we analyzed eight single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in genes definitively associated with interindividual variation in leukocyte telomere length (LTL) in prior genome-wide association studies: ACYP2, TERC, NAF1, TERT, OBFC1, CTC1, ZNF208 and RTEL1 Six of these SNPs were associated (P &lt; 0.05) with neuroblastoma risk, one with leukemia risk and one with osteosarcoma risk.
In search of the gene for progressive epilepsy with mental retardation (EPMR) we identified DLGAP2, the human homolog of the gene encoding the rat PSD-95/SAP90-associated protein-2 (Dlgap2).
DLGAP2 was excluded as the gene responsible for EPMR.
PERP (p53 apoptosis effector related to PMP-22), a transcriptional target of p53, is downregulated and contributes to the impairment of apoptosis in uveal melanoma (UM).
Downregulation of PERP is associated with the aggressive, monosomy 3-type of uveal melanoma (UM), the most common primary intraocular tumour in adults, and increased PERP expression has a pro-apoptotic effect in UM cells.
In primary uveal melanoma (UM), the most common intraocular malignancy in adults that has a reportedly unaffected signalling pathway upstream of and including p53, PERP expression is down-regulated in the metastatic monosomy 3-type tumours, compared with the less aggressive disomy 3-type tumours.
Expression of PERP (p53 apoptosis effector related to PMP-22) was investigated in primary uveal melanomas and its variation was analyzed in relation to clinico-pathological and cytogenetical characteristics of these tumors.
The transcriptional level of PERP gene was measured by quantitative real-time RT-PCR in 26 uveal melanomas with known chromosomes 3 and 8 status.
The altered expression of PERP highlighted this apoptosis-specific target of p53 as a possible contributor to apoptosis in uveal melanoma with PERP downregulation being particularly relevant to the aggressive (monosomy 3) type of uveal melanoma.
As PERP is a novel type of p53 effector that is likely to stimulate apoptosis through a mechanism distinct from that of Bcl-2-related mitochondrial effectors, further elucidation of its role in uveal melanoma pathogenesis will assist in the design of novel therapeutic approaches aimed at increasing the rate of apoptosis in this tumor.
In human acquired cholesteatoma, the expression of proinflammatory cytokines (IL-1Beta, TNF-Alfa and IL-6) and matrix metalloproteinases (MMP-2, MMP-8 and MMP-9) were up-regulated, and their expression levels were positively correlated with TREM-2 expression.
Additional data showed that TREM-2 up-regulated IL-1Beta and IL-6 expression via TLR4 instead of the TLR2 signaling pathway and promoted MMP-2 and MMP-8 secretion and osteoclast activation in experimentally acquired cholesteatoma.
However, the expression and function of TLRs in cholesteatoma remain unclear.We observed inflammatory cell infiltration of the matrix and prematrix of human acquired cholesteatoma, as well as dramatically increased expression of TLR4 and the pro-inflammatory cytokines TNF-Alfa and IL-1Beta.
Moreover, TLR4 deficiency was protective against experimental acquired cholesteatoma-driven bone destruction and hearing loss, as it reduced local TNF-Alfa and IL-1Beta expression and impaired osteoclast formation by decreasing expression of the osteoclast effectors receptor activator of nuclear factor (NF)-KB ligand (RANKL) and tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP).
TNF-Alfa and IL-1Beta can be induced by purified HMGB-1 combined with CpG-DNA in the cholesteatoma keratinocytes.
This study suggested that persistent expression of extracellular HMGB-1 and DNA fragments in cholesteatoma leads to TNF-Alfa and IL-1Beta production, causing bone resorption and destruction.
The Luminex Multiplex xMAP bead-based antibody assay was applied to measure the concentrations of 44 cytokines, chemokines, and growth factors (BIRC5, CCL11, CCL2, CCL3, CCL4, CCL5, CCL7, CD40LG, CSF2, CSF3, CX3CL1, CXCL10, CXCL9, EGF, HGF, ICAM1, IFNA2, IFNG, IL10, IL12*, IL12B, IL13, IL15, IL17A, IL17F, IL1A, IL1B, IL1R1, IL2, IL20, IL21, IL22, IL23A, IL4, IL5, IL6, IL7, IL8, LTA, MIF, TGFA, TGFB1, TNF, VEGFA) in human biopsies from cholesteatoma, neck of cholesteatoma (the transition zone from tympanic membrane), tympanic membrane, external auditory canal skin, and middle ear mucosa.
All mice with experimentally induced cholesteatoma showed hearing impairment and an upregulated expression of TNF-Alfa, IL-1Beta, and IL-6.
The levels of IL-1beta in cholesteatoma and EACS were 0.41+/-0.06 and 0.24+/-0.02, respectively.
The ratio of IL-1 beta and IL-8 of aural cholesteatoma was significantly higher than that of EACS and PAS.
We suggest that both of IL-1 alpha and IL-1 beta may play a role in the pathological changes, and that IL-8, which is mainly produced from cholesteatomatous epithelium, may have an important role in the pathological changes of cholesteatomas.
Two years later, both T2DM and eCCl &lt;60 mL/min were associated with poorer cognitive scores, and 19.7% of the participants developed cognitive decline (mild cognitive impairment or dementia).
ChiPseq revealed that the nuclear (n) form of FGFR1, a pan-ontogenic regulator, is overexpressed in schizophrenia NCCs and overtargets dysregulated mRNA and miRNA genes.
The nFGFR1 targeted 54% of all human gene promoters and 84.4% of schizophrenia dysregulated genes.
Our results indicate (i) an early (preneuronal) genomic etiology of schizophrenia, (ii) dysregulated genes and new coordinated gene networks are common to unrelated cases of schizophrenia, (iii) gene dysregulations are accompanied by increased nFGFR1-genome interactions, and (iv) modeling of increased nFGFR1 by an overexpression of a nFGFR1 lead to up or downregulation of selected genes as observed in schizophrenia NCCs.
Together our results designate nFGFR1 signaling as a potential common dysregulated mechanism in investigated patients and potential therapeutic target in schizophrenia.
Relative to unaffected comparison subjects, subjects with schizophrenia exhibited elevated mRNA levels for 1) the transcription factor MafB, which is expressed by parvalbumin and somatostatin neurons as they migrate from the medial ganglionic eminence to the cortex, 2) the transcriptional coactivator PGC-1Alfa, which is expressed postnatally by parvalbumin neurons to maintain parvalbumin levels and inhibitory function, and 3) FgfR1, which is required for the migration and phenotypic specification of parvalbumin and somatostatin neurons.
This assignment excludes Pon1 as a candidate for the atherosclerosis susceptibility genes Ath1, Ath2, and Ath3.
The expression level of Robo4 increases gradually along with the development of diabetic retinopathy (DR).
We conclude that Robo4 inhibits angiogenesis and vessel permeability independently of its cytoplasmic domain, while activating VEGFR2-Y951 via ROBO4 inhibition might accelerate tissue revascularization in retinopathy of prematurity and in diabetic patients.
We determined if hypoxia-inducible factor-1Alfa (HIF-1Alfa) and Roundabout4 (Robo4) colocalized in fibrovascular membranes (FVM) from patients with proliferative diabetic retinopathy (PDR), and investigated the regulation of HIF-1Alfa on Robo4 in microvascular endothelial cells under normoxic and hypoxic conditions in vitro.
To determine if hypoxia-inducible factor-1Alfa (HIF-1Alfa) and Robo4 colocalized in fibrovascular membranes (FVM) from patients with proliferative diabetic retinopathy and to investigate the regulation of HIF-1Alfa on Robo4 in microvascular endothelial cells under normoxic and hypoxic conditions in vitro.
Our results indicate that augmenting the host Robo4/Slit2 system could provide a useful therapeutic approach to control pathological angiogenesis associated with HSV induced stromal keratitis.
Consistent with these in vitro studies, inhibition of Arf6 activity in vivo phenocopies Robo4 activation by reducing pathologic angiogenesis in choroidal and retinal vascular disease and VEGF-165 (vascular endothelial growth factor-165)-induced retinal hyperpermeability.
This study investigated the effect of Robo4 on the formation of fibrovascular membranes (FVMs) from patients with proliferative diabetic retinopathy and its roles in choroid-retina endothelial (RF/6A) and human retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) cells.
Immunohistochemical stains for markers which have known variable specificity for sex cord-stromal lineage [inhibin, calretinin, MART-1/melan-A, CD99, steroidogenic factor 1 (SF-1, adrenal 4-binding protein), and WT1], were performed in 127 cases of 5 different types of ovarian sex cord-stromal tumors: adult granulosa cell tumor (n=32), Sertoli cell tumor (n=27), Sertoli-Leydig cell tumor (n=18), steroid cell tumor (n=25), and fibroma/fibrothecoma (n=25).
Although each of the different types of sex cord-stromal tumors has a slightly unique immunoprofile in terms of frequency and extent of expression, these differences are relatively minor for most types of tumors with certain exceptions (eg, WT1 is not diagnostically useful in steroid cell tumor; CD99 is not diagnostically useful in fibroma/fibrothecoma; the only sex cord-stromal tumor for which MART-1 is diagnostically useful is steroid cell tumor; inhibin and calretinin are less diagnostically useful in fibroma/fibrothecoma than in the other types of tumors, but expression in fibrothecoma was higher than in fibroma).
The AKNA gene is part of the 9q32 susceptibility locus for cervical cancer.
Therefore, AKNA appears to be an important genetic factor associated with the risk cervical cancer.
Here we report on CNS MRI findings from two female individuals with BFLS due to a de novo duplication in PHF6 who presented with typical BFLS and epilepsy.
Furthermore, two CSS patients were reported to have a PHF6 abnormality, which can also cause Borjeson-Forssman-Lehmann syndrome (OMIM#301900), an X-linked intellectual disability syndrome with epilepsy and endocrine abnormalities.
Eight-week-old CCR9-deficient mice were injected with a collagen II monoclonal antibody cocktail to create a rheumatoid arthritis model.
To address the question of B cell migration into the inflamed synovial tissue of patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA), peripheral blood naive B cells, memory B cells and plasma cells were analyzed for cell surface expression of the chemokine receptors CXCR3, CXCR4, CXCR5, CCR5, CCR6, CCR7 and CCR9.
Candida-associated lesions (CALs) and burning mouth syndrome (BMS) may induce glossodynia without objective manifestations.
We divided stroke-prone spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHRSPs), as hypertensive and vascular dementia model rats, into five groups, telmisartan-treated (TLM), TLM+GW9662, a PPAR-gamma inhibitor, -treated (T+G), GW9662-treated (GW), TLM+ANA-12, a TrkB antagonist, -treated (T+A), and vehicle-treated SHRSPs (VEH).
The purpose of this study was to investigate the effects of MCM4 in laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma (LSCC) cell growth and apoptosis.
The results showed that siRNA of MCM4 could significantly inhibit LSCC cell line UMSCC 5 proliferation and induce apoptosis.
MCM4 mRNA was higher expressed in carcinoma tissues than in adjacent normal tissues.
We noticed a significant role for MCM4 overexpression in human LSCC tissues and their corresponding adjacent non-neoplastic tissues and found that siRNA of MCM4 can significantly decrease the proliferation of cancer cells.
It is suggested that MCM4 profiling could potentially be used to predict response to treatment and prognosis in LSCC.
Furthermore, we identified some potential lung cancer driver genes, such as TBX2, MCM4, SLC2A1, BIRC5, and CDC20, whose expression is significantly upregulated in lung cancer, and the copy number of these genes is amplified in the genome of patients with lung cancer.
An analysis of gene regulatory networks showed that replicative helicase proteins (MCM2, MCM4, MCM5, MCM6, and MCM10) and DNA polymerases (PLOA1/E2/E3/Q) have enhanced DNA replication in cervical cancer.
The association between E2F2, MCM4, CCNE2 and WHSC1 and overall survival (OS) and recurrence-free survival (RFS) in ovarian cancer patients were assessed using Kaplan-Meier plotter.
MCM4, CCNE2, and WHSC1 are co-upregulated with E2F2 among the 308 ovarian cancer samples (Pearson's r=0.5159, 0.3963 and 0.4941 respectively).
MCM4, CCNE2, and WHSC1 are co-upregulated with E2F2 in ovarian cancer.
Enforced E2F2 expression significantly increased MCM4, CCNE2, and WHSC1 expression in ovarian cancer cells.
The quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction analysis verified the upregulation of ASAH1, PCBP2, DDX5, MCM5, TAGLN2, hnRNPA1, ENO1, TYPH, CYC, and MCM4 in squamous cell carcinoma compared to normal cervix ( p &lt; 0.05).
Seven core transcription factors (MCM4, VWF, ECT2, RBMS3, LIMCH1, MYBL2 and FBXL7) are detected, and have been reported to contribute to tumorigenesis of lung adenocarcinoma.
The objective of this study is to determine the efficiency of YKL-40, HE-4 and DKK-3 levels in early diagnosis of patients with endometrial cancer and in the pre-operative estimation of the prognostic parameters such as stage, grade and the extension of the disease.
The aim of the study was to determine the differential expression patterns of the wingless-type (Wnt) pathway inhibitors Dkk3 (Dickkopf 3), SFRP1 (secreted frizzled-related protein 1), and SFRP4 in normal mullerian tissue and endometrial endometrioid adenocarcinoma specimens.
There was a difference in Dkk3 protein expression between normal mullerian tissues and primary endometrial endometrioid adenocarcinoma samples (P = 0.05).
We investigated whether Dkk3 plays an important role in the carcinogenesis of endometrial cancer (EC).
Dkk3 gene expression is frequently downregulated in endometrial cancer, and is associated with poor prognostic clinicopathologic markers.
The levels of Dkk-3 protein were assessed by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay in the sera of 104 patients with gynecological cancer: 36 with ovarian, 40 with cervical and 28 with endometrial cancers.
But serum levels of Dkk-3 protein in patients with cervical [166.39 (300.68) pg/mL] (P = 0.013) and endometrial cancers [73.64 (23.36) pg/mL] (P = 0.000) were higher than in normal individuals.
The serum levels of Dkk-3 protein were associated with clinical stage in patients with cervical and endometrial cancers.
Dkk-3 protein detection using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay as molecular markers can contribute to detection and diagnosis of gynecological cancer, especially for ovarian cancer and endometrial cancer.
Gene expressions of ARG1, CTSL, COX2, and IL6 were higher in tumor-infiltrating CD11b(+)CD11c(+) cells compared with PBMCs isolated from colorectal cancer patients.
Expression of surface HLA-DR and CD86 on CD11b(+)CD11c(+) cells was down-regulated, and T cell-stimulating ability was attenuated compared with PBMCs, suggesting that an immunosuppressive phenotype might be induced by IL-6, ARG1, CTSL, and COX2 in tumor sites of colorectal cancer patients.
Tumor-infiltrating CD11c(+) DCs in human colon cancer specimens were shown to produce CCL5.
To assess and compare cAIx in patients with peripheral arterial disease (PAD) and / or abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA).
Differences in cAIx measurements between the three patient groups were tested by non-parametric tests and stepwise multivariate linear regression analysis to investigate associations with obstructive or aneurysmatic patterns of vascular disease.
Non-invasive assessment of arterial stiffness in high-risk patients indicates that cAIx differs according to the pattern of vascular disease.
In the present study, we investigated the prevalence of rs2424913 single nucleotide polymorphism located in DNMT3B gene Promotor by restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) in Egyptian pediatric chronic immune thrombocytopenia (ITP) patients and controls.
The current study investigated the association between DNMT3B 579G&gt;T and the risk for idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP).
The purpose of this study was to investigate the association between the single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in promoter of the DNMT3B gene and the risk for development of idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP).
18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography-(PET)/computed tomography (CT) imaging is used for staging and treatment planning of patients with anal cancer.
The aim of this study was to evaluate the relevance of PET/CT and 18F-FDG as a strategy for response evaluation after chemoradiotherapy for anal cancer.
Conclusion:18F-FDG PET/CT shows good accuracy in posttreatment evaluation of anal cancer and has a relevant impact on patient management.
Thus, 18F-FDG PET/CT may play a significant role during posttreatment follow-up of anal cancer.
FDG-PET/CT is considered to be a crucial tool in pretherapeutic assessment of esophageal, localized pancreatic and anal cancer.
to determine whether [(18)F]2-fluoro-2-deoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography and X-ray computed tomography (PET/CT) findings and metabolic parameters before combined chemo- and radiotherapy (CRT) have a prognostic value in patients with anal carcinoma.
45 patients with anal cancer who underwent pre-treatment FDG-PET/CT were included.
the extent of disease on FDG PET/CT before combined radio-chemotherapy is strongly predictive of prognosis in anal cancer.
Fluorine-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (F-FDG) PET-computed tomography (CT) is used in the assessment of anal cancer, but its routine use is not established.
The aim of this study was to assess the value of F-FDG-PET-CT in staging and post-treatment assessment in anal cancer and to determine its impact on management.
To test the hypothesis that irradiated volume of specific subregions of pelvic active bone marrow as detected by (18)FDG-PET may be a predictor of decreased blood cells nadirs in anal cancer patients undergoing concurrent chemoradiation, we analyzed 44 patients submitted to IMRT and concurrent chemotherapy.
The cohort included 45 patients with nonmetastatic anal cancer who underwent FDG-PET imaging prior to definitive chemoradiation with mitomycin-C and 5-fluorouracil.
We hypothesize that posttreatment F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography-computed tomography (FDG PET-CT) metabolic response predicts clinical outcomes in patients with anal cancer treated with chemoradiation.
Complete metabolic response on posttreatment FDG PET-CT is highly predictive of increased PFS and OS in patients treated with chemoradiation for anal carcinoma.
The present work studies the correlation of (18) F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/computed tomography (FDG-PET/CT) standardized uptake value (SUV) with tumor characteristics, clinical response and prognosis in a series of anal canal cancer patients treated with chemo-radiotherapy.
Our data suggest that pre-treatment FDG-PET/CT SUVmax cannot directly predict tumor response and survival, but it is strongly associated with tumor characteristics such as primary tumor stage and histology, being the first one of the most important and validated prognostic factors for anal cancer.
All patients experienced at least one grade &gt;= 3 treatment-related adverse event, most commonly fatigue, elevated GGT, and lymphopenia.
PHC patients with hypersplenism who displayed elevated levels of alanine transaminase (ALT), aspartate transaminase (AST), Gamma-glutamyltransferase (GGT), ALK, phosphatase, and prolonged prothrombin time (PT) had a significantly increased risk of HCC.
In patients with PHC and hypersplenism, abnormal levels of ALT, AST, ALP, and GGT and prolonged PT are risk factors of HCC.
Two years later, laboratory findings revealed high levels of aminotransferases and Gamma-glutamyltransferase (GGT), thrombocytopenia, and neutropenia.
Cancer-selective tetra-branched peptides, named NT4, can be coupled to different functional units for cancer cell imaging or therapy.
NT4 peptides specifically bind to lipoprotein receptor-related proteins (LRP) receptors and to heparan sulfate chains on membrane proteoglycans and can be efficiently internalized by cancer cells expressing these membrane targets.
Since binding and internalization of NT4 peptides is mediated by specific NT4 receptors on cancer cell membranes and this may allow drug resistance produced by drug membrane transporters to be by-passed, we tested the ability of drug-armed NT4 to by-pass drug resistance in cancer cell lines.
We found that MTX-conjugated NT4 allows drug resistance to be by-passed in MTX-resistant human breast cancer cells lacking expression of folate reduced carrier.
NT4 peptides appear to be extremely promising cancer-selective targeting agents that can be exploited as theranostics in personalized oncological applications.
However, the accurate implication of the two specific ligands of tropomyosin kinase B receptor, BDNF and neurotrophic factor 4 (NT4/5), has not been studied in colorectal cancer (CRC) patients.
As BDNF and NT4/5 are implicated in the response of psychoactive treatments applied to manage depression, which frequently occurs in cancer patients, they cannot be used as prognostic or diagnostic markers for CRC in these patients.
Finally, the cortical spinal tract regeneration was detected by DBA tracing at 4 weeks post operation, and the expression of nerve growth factor (NGF), BDNF, neurotrophic factor (NT)-3, NT-4, fibroblast growth factor (FGF-2)-2, B cell lymphoma 2 (BCL-2) assaciated X protein (BAX) and BCL-2 in the caudal cord tissues was assessed by reverse transcription-PCR.
The tetra-branched peptide NT4 selectively binds to different human cancer cells and tissues.
NT4 specifically binds to sulfated glycosaminoglycans on cancer cell membranes.
Since sulfated glycosaminoglycans are involved in cancer cell interaction with the extracellular matrix, we evaluated the effect of NT4 on cancer cell adhesion and migration.
NT4 inhibits cancer cell adhesion and migration on different proteins, without modifying cancer cell morphology or their ability to produce protrusions, but dramatically affecting the directionality and polarity of cell movement.
Results obtained by taking advantage of the selective targeting of glycosaminoglycans chains by NT4, provide insights into the role of heparan sulfate proteoglycans in cancer cell adhesion and migration and suggest a determinant role of sulfated glycosaminoglycans in the control of cancer cell directional migration.
Biological activity of NT4-paclitaxel was tested in vitro on MDA-MB 231 and SKOV-3 cell lines, representing breast and ovarian cancer, respectively, and in vivo in an orthotopic mouse model of human breast cancer.
To evaluate novel clinical markers of endometriosis including the neurotrophins brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), nerve growth factor (NGF), and neurotrophin 4/5 (NT4/5) and compare them to others previously reported in the literature including cancer antigen 125 (CA-125) and C-reactive protein (CRP).
These results indicated that rAAV-NT4-TAT-6His-Shepherdin may be considered a novel therapeutic strategy in the gene therapy for gallbladder carcinoma.
In the present study, the tetrabranched neurotensin peptide NT4 was conjugated with functional units for cancer-cell imaging or therapy and was tested on bladder cancer cell lines and specimens from bladder cancer surgical resections, in order to evaluate its potential for targeted personalized therapy of bladder cancer.
Fluorophore-conjugated NT4 distinguished healthy and cancer tissues with good statistical significance (P &lt; 0.05).
NT4 conjugated to methotrexate or gemcitabine was cytotoxic for human bladder cancer cell lines at micromolar concentrations.
Their selectivity for bladder cancer tissue and capacity to carry tracers or drugs make NT4 peptides candidate tumor targeting agents for tracing cancer cells and for personalized therapy of human bladder cancer.
The phenotype is the result of haploinsufficiency of at least two regions on 10p, the HDR1 region associated with hypoparathyroidism, sensorineural deafness, and renal defects (HDR syndrome) and the more proximal region DGCR2 responsible for heart defects and thymus hypoplasia/aplasia.
Six miRNAs previously identified as prognostic markers in Asian patients (miR-21-5p, miR-20a-5p, miR-103a-3p, miR-106b-5p, miR-143-5p, and miR-215) were studied in tumor samples from 71 white patients with stage II colon cancer.
The 6 circulating miRNAs most frequently found to be dysregulated in colorectal cancer are miR-18a-5p, miR-21-5p, miR-29a-5p, miR-92a-5p, miR-143-5p and miR-378-5p.
We transfected HCT-116, a highly invasive colon cancer cell line, with corresponding downregulated miRNA and demonstrated that overexpression of three miRNA (miR200c*, miR143*, and miR424*) significantly abrogated invasive potential.
This study demonstrated that the TRI-HFT is a reliable and sensitive measure to assess unilateral hand gross motor function in persons with tetraplegia, with moderate to strong construct validity.
For the patients with RD without anti-inflammatory optimization, those with mutant XIAP and FOXP3 died of Crohn's-like colitis and electrolyte exhaustion in awaiting transplantation, while transplantation cured the STAT1 patient.
Our results show that alliin ameliorates DSS-induced ulcerative colitis and inhibits the inflammatory responses in LPS-stimulated RAW264.7 cells partly through inhibiting ERK1/2-, JNK-/PPAR-Gamma-stimulated NF-KB/AP-1/STAT-1 activations.
These data support a role for endogenous IFN-1 as a context-dependent modulator of T-cell function that promotes regulatory activity in healthy human intestine, but indicate that the IFN-1/STAT1 pathway is dysregulated in inflammatory bowel disease.
In this study, we report an alternative mechanism by which integrin-linked kinase (ILK) post-transcriptionally modulates the expression of MUC1-C by maintaining its protein stability in pancreatic cancer cells.
From a mechanistic perspective, the present finding, together with our recent report that ILK controls the expression of oncogenic KRAS through a regulatory loop, underscores the pivotal role of ILK in promoting pancreatic cancer progression.
Our recent work demonstrated a KRAS-integrin-linked kinase (ILK) regulatory feedback loop that allows pancreatic cancer cells to regulate KRAS expression and to interact with the tumor microenvironment to promote aggressive phenotype.
This regulatory loop, however, was not noted in KRAS mutant colorectal and lung cancer cells examined as knockdown of KRAS or ILK did not affect each other's expression, suggesting that this KRAS-ILK feedback regulation is specific for pancreatic cancer.
In sum, this regulatory loop provides a strong mechanistic rationale for suppressing oncogenic KRAS signaling through targeting ILK, and this creating a potential new therapeutic strategy for pancreatic cancer.
Recent data have revealed that KRAS is interconnected to ILK and hnRNP A1 in a circuitry that enables pancreatic cancer cells to maintain an aggressive phenotype.
Integrin-linked kinase (ILK) is a mediator of aggressive phenotype in pancreatic cancer.
On the basis of our finding that knockdown of either KRAS or ILK has a reciprocal effect on the other's expression, we hypothesized the presence of an ILK-KRAS regulatory loop that enables pancreatic cancer cells to regulate KRAS expression.
This study aimed to elucidate the mechanism by which this regulatory circuitry is regulated and to investigate the translational potential of targeting ILK to suppress oncogenic KRAS signaling in pancreatic cancer.
The knockdown or pharmacological inhibition of ILK suppressed pancreatic tumor growth, in part, by suppressing KRAS signaling.
These studies suggest that this KRAS-E2F1-ILK-hnRNPA1 regulatory loop enables pancreatic cancer cells to promote oncogenic KRAS signaling and to interact with the tumor microenvironment to promote aggressive phenotypes.
This regulatory loop provides a mechanistic rationale for targeting ILK to suppress oncogenic KRAS signaling, which might foster new therapeutic strategies for pancreatic cancer.
In conclusion, the activation of PAR-2 signaling induced human pancreatic cancer progression through the induction of TGF-Alfa expression by ILK/HIFs-Alfa, as well as through MEK/VEGF-A-mediated angiogenesis, and it plays a role in the interaction between cancer progression and cancer-related thrombosis.
In this study, we examined the effect of a lentivirus-mediated knockdown of ILK on the proliferation, migration and invasion of pancreatic cancer (Panc-1) cells.
Immunohistochemical staining showed that ILK expression was enhanced in pancreatic cancer tissue.
These findings indicate that ILK may be a new diagnostic marker for pancreatic cancer and that silencing ILK could be a potentially useful therapeutic approach for treating pancreatic cancer.
In the previous study, we have shown that metabotropic glutamate receptor 7 (mGluR7) and extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1 and 2 (ERK1/2) signaling may be involved in the developmental sevoflurane neurotoxicity.
These results suggested that Beta-arr1 and 2 may differently modulate mGluR7 signaling in developmental sevoflurane neurotoxicity.
In both models of neurotoxicity, namely OGD- and KA-induced injury, the neuroprotective effects of AMN082 (1 myM) were reversed by the selective mGlu7 antagonist, 6-(4-Methoxyphenyl)-5-methyl-3-(4-pyridinyl)-isoxazolo[4,5-c]pyridin-4(5H)-one hydrochloride (MMPIP, 1 myM), suggesting the mGlu7-dependent mechanism of neuroprotective effects of AMN082.
The present study was designed to evaluate the possible neuroprotective effects of metabotropic glutamate receptor (mGluR7) allosteric agonist N,N'-dibenzhydrylethane-1,2-diamine dihydrochloride (AMN082) on developmental sevoflurane neurotoxicity.
Further studies are needed to fully assess the neuroprotective role of mGluR7 agonist AMN082 in developmental anesthetic neurotoxicity.
The present study aimed to examine the role of mGluR3/mGluR7 in lead-induced neurotoxicity.
The impact of lead exposure on mGluR3 and mGluR7 mRNA expression in hippocampal tissue of pups were investigated by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction and its potential role in lead neurotoxicity were discussed.
However, the current study does not provide evidence that the expression of rat hippocampal mGluR3 and mGluR7 can be altered by systemic administration of lead during gestation and lactation, which are informative for the field of lead-induced developmental neurotoxicity noting that it seems not to be worthwhile to include mGluR3 and mGluR7 in future studies.
We determined whether mGluRs subtypes 1, 3, and 7 (mGluR1, mGluR3, and mGluR7) were involved in developmental neurotoxicity due to lead.
Flow cytometry effectively identifies major forms of PIDs, including severe combined immunodeficiency, X-linked agammaglobulinemia, hyper IgM syndromes, Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, X-linked lymphoproliferative syndrome, familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis, autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome, IPEX syndrome, CTLA 4 haploinsufficiency and LRBA deficiency, IRAK4 and MyD88 deficiencies, Mendelian susceptibility to mycobacterial disease, chronic mucocuneous candidiasis, and chronic granulomatous disease.
OGR1 deficiency reduced insulin secretion induced by glucose administered ip, although it was not associated with glucose intolerance in vivo.
Objective: To summarize the clinical characteristics of the diffuse parenchymal lung diseases in a child caused by a novel compound heterozygous ABCA3 mutation and explore the association between the phenotype and ABCA3 mutation.
Method: The clinical material of a patient diagnosed with diffuse parenchymal lung disease with ABCA3 mutation in December 2016 in Shenzhen Children's Hospital was analyzed.
Conclusion: c.1755delC+c.2890G&gt;A is a new kind of compound heterozygous mutation in ABCA3, which can cause children's diffuse parenchymal lung disease.
However, interstitial lung diseases have also been observed in full-term infants with mutations in the SFTPC, SFTPB, NKX2-1, or ABCA3 genes, involved in the surfactant metabolism.
Herein, we report a newborn baby with neonatal respiratory distress and diffuse lung disease caused by ABCA3 mutation.
Genomic DNA was analyzed for four genes involved in surfactant metabolism out of which the c. 4545C&gt;G (p.Tyr1515*) homozygous mutation in exon 29 of ABCA3 was identified which is one of the most frequent mutation causing lethal neonatal respiratory failure in a term neonate.
Biallelic mutations of ABCA3 has been associated with fatal respiratory distress syndrome and interstitial lung disease (ILD) in children.
However, whether variations in ABCA3 have a role in the development of adult ILD, including idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), remains to be addressed.
Airway cells expressing surfactant protein (SP)-C and ATP binding cassette subfamily A member 3, alveolar pod cells expressing keratin (KRT) 5, and pulmonary fibrosis were observed when these mice were infected with a sublethal dose of HKx31, H3N2 influenza A virus.
Antitumor activity of saffron (Crocus sativus) extract a commonly used spice in India was studied against intraperitoneally transplanted sarcoma-180 (S-180), Ehrlich ascites Carcinoma (EAC) and Dalton's lymphoma ascites (DLA) tumours in mice.
Our results suggest that obesity can be produced in BARs by feeding HFD.
cEDS can be caused by heterozygosity for missense mutations in genes COL5A2 and COL5A1, which encode the Alfa2(V) and Alfa1(V) chains, respectively, of collagen V, and is most often caused by COL5A1 null alleles.
On the whole, our findings indicate that the Kras, Col5a1 and Furin genes may play essential roles in the molecular mechanisms of SMCD, which warrants further investigation.
Gene expression of transforming growth factor beta 1, various asthma-related collagen types [collagen, type I, alpha 1; collagen, type II, alpha 1; collagen, type III, alpha 1; collagen, type V, alpha 1 (COL5A1) and collagen, type V, alpha 2], and ATG5 were measured using mRNA isolated from bronchial biopsies of refractory asthmatic subjects and assessed for pairwise associations.
In refractory asthmatic individuals, gene expression of ATG5 was positively associated with COL5A1 in the airways.
Positive correlation between the gene expression patterns of ATG5 and COL5A1 suggests that dysregulated autophagy may contribute to subepithelial fibrosis in the airways of refractory asthmatic individuals.
Recently, we observed regulator roles of selenium (Se) on apoptosis and Ca2+ entry through transient receptor potential vanilloid 1 (TRPV1) channels in the cancer cell lines.
We investigated the effects of JWH-133 (CB2 agonist) and RTX (TRPV1 agonist) in six human Osteosarcoma cell lines: MG-63, U-2OS, MNNG/HOS, Saos-2, KHOS/NP, Hs888Lu, by Apoptosis and Migration-Assay.
Our results show that both CB2 stimulation and TRPV1 activation, in different Osteosarcoma cell lines, can act on the same pathways to obtain the same effect, indicating the Endocannabinoid/Endovanilloid system as a new therapeutic target in Osteosarcoma.
Whether coadministration of a CB2 receptor agonist and morphine could reduce TRPV1 expression in morphine-induced antinociception and tolerance in cancer pain is unclear.
Therefore, we investigated the effects of coadministration of a CB2 receptor agonist AM1241 and morphine on TRPV1 expression and tolerance in cancer pain.
Our findings suggest that coadministration of a CB2 receptor agonist AM1241 and morphine reduced morphine tolerance possibly through regulation of TRPV1 protein expression in the DRG in cancer pain.
Clinical trial of resiniferatoxin from Euphorbia species is successfully aimed at TRPV1 in cancer pain management and heading toward new selective painkiller status that further validates this target for drug discovery efforts.
In erosive gastritis, increased proliferation (MET) and transport (UCP2, SCFD1, KPNA4) were found, while genes associated with adhesion (SIGLEC11), transcription regulation (ESRRG), and electron and ion transport (ACADM, CLIC6) were down-regulated.
In addition, EphA4 has been found to play a role in cancer biology as well as in the pathogenesis of several neurological disorders such as stroke, spinal cord injury, multiple sclerosis, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), and Alzheimer's disease.
However, aberrant EphA4 activity can inhibit neural repair after injury and exacerbate neurodegenerative diseases such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and Alzheimer's.
Additional to involvement in diverse physiological and pathological processes such as axon regeneration, synaptic plasticity, and cancers, EphA4 receptor has been recently identified as the only amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) modifier.
In conclusion, our results strongly suggest a role for Acrp30 oligomerization in OSAS; in fact, the down-regulation of Acpr30 and its HMW oligomers seems to be correlated to illness status independently of concomitant presence of obesity.
SOM-14 and HMW-SOM are depleted in cortical tissue from cases of pre-senile Alzheimer-type dementia (ATD), but there is a disproportionate reduction in HMW-SOM.
Data on plasma acylated ghrelin (AG) and unacylated ghrelin (UAG) levels in acromegaly are limited.
We studied the ACTH and cortisol response to acylated ghrelin in 49 patients with history of pituitary disease.
Our data show that testing with acylated ghrelin is not a useful diagnostic tool for the diagnosis of central hypocortisolism; particularly ghrelin test adds no more information that basal cortisol evaluation in the diagnosis of ACTH deficiency in patients with hypothalamus-pituitary disease.
The objective of the study was to test the hypothesis that remission of acromegaly after surgical therapy increases weight and adiposity and some CV risk markers and these changes are paralleled by a rise in ghrelin.
Weight, waist circumference, and ghrelin did not increase significantly in the persistent active acromegaly group.
Although most markers of CV risk improve with acromegaly remission after surgery, some markers and adiposity increase and are paralleled by a rise in total ghrelin, suggesting that these changes may be related.
Ghrelin has been administered as an infusion or a bolus in a variety of doses to 1850 study participants, including healthy participants and patients with obesity, prior gastrectomy, cancer, pituitary disease, diabetes mellitus, eating disorders, and other conditions.
The cation cotransporters Na(+)-K(+)-2Cl(-) cotransporter 1 and 2 (NKCC1 and NKCC2) and Na(+)-Cl cotransporter (NCC) are phosphorylated and activated by the kinases Ste20-related proline alanine-rich kinase (SPAK) and oxidative stress-responsive kinase (OSR1), and their targeted disruption in mice causes phenotypes resembling the human disorders Bartter syndrome and Gitelman syndrome, reflecting reduced NKCC2 and NCC activity, respectively.
Keeping this in mind, attenuation of MT might be a mechanism underlying the prevalence of end-stage renal disease documented in hypertensive African-Americans with decreased NKCC1 activity and in hypertensive patients subjected to chronic HCD treatment.
Association of the HLA class I region, independent of known HLA class II effects, has now been detected for several AIDs, including strong association of HLA-B with type 1 diabetes and HLA-C with multiple sclerosis and Graves' disease.
The present study was undertaken in 117 new patients with Graves' disease, typed for HLA-A, HLA-B, HLA-C and DR antigens and IgG heavy chain markers, to determine whether these characteristics could be used to segregate patients into clinically relevant subsets.
The study aimed at: 1) assessing occurrence of HLA-A, HLA-B and HLA-C antigens in patients with Graves' disease in comparison with control group of healthy individuals; 2) determining relationship between circulating serum antimicrosomal and antithyroglobulin antibodies and selected HLA complex antigens.
HLA-B8, HLA-B15, HLA-B35, and HLA-Cw3 antibodies were detected more frequently in patients with Graves' disease than in the healthy individuals.
The role of caspase-12 and caspase-4 in inflammation associated with cerebral ischemia, a condition that results from a transient or permanent reduction of cerebral blood flow, is still unknown.
Fyn(-/-) mice developed prediabetes after 16-wk high-fat diet treatment and exhibited thermal hypoalgesia, without showing tactile allodynia or altered expression and activation of NR2B subunit, relative to normal diet-fed Fyn(-/-) mice.
Our results suggested that Fyn-mediated NR2B signaling plays a critical role in regulation of prediabetic neuropathy and that the increased expression/function of NR2B subunit-containing NMDARs may contribute to the progression of neuropathy in type 2 diabetes.
In addition, loss of GluN2B in AgRP neurons of the morbidly obese and severely diabetic leptin-deficient Lep (ob/ob) mice does not affect body weight and food intake but, remarkably, leads to full correction of hyperglycemia.
The study aimed to investigate the role of NR2B in cognitive dysfunction in the rats with type 1 diabetes and define the protective effects of L-NBP on cognition.
To evaluate the role of three-dimensional constructive interference in steady state (3D-CISS) sequences and phase-contrast magnetic resonance imaging (PC-MRI) in patients with arrested hydrocephalus.
We concluded that 3D-CISS and PC-MRI are noninvasive sequences for diagnosis of the level and cause of arrested hydrocephalus.
To evaluate efficacy of three-dimensional (3D) heavily T2-weighted (W) MRI sequences in assessment of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pathways and to compare two different types of 3D heavily T2W MRI sequences (CISS and SPACE) with two-dimensional (2D) T2W turbo spin echo (TSE) sequences for hydrocephalus with intraventricular obstruction.
Therefore, the article focuses mainly on the effective usage of various MRI sequences in both diagnosis and follow-up of pediatric hydrocephalus, such as 3D CISS, cine PC, TSE, and GRE T2* sequences, to be able to investigate all possible obstructive pathology through the CSF pathway and to assess the efficiency of treatment in a standardized way.
We will consider mtDNA based syndromes such as LHON/dystonia/Mitochondrial Encephalomyopahty Lactic Acidosis Stroke-like (MELAS)/Leigh overlapping syndrome, or nuclear based diseases such as Friedreich ataxia (mutations in FXN gene), deafness-dystonia-optic atrophy (Mohr-Tranebjerg) syndrome (mutations in TIMM8A), complicated hereditary spastic paraplegia (mutations in SPG7), DOA "plus" syndromes (mutations in OPA1), Charcot-Marie-Tooth type 2A (CMT2A) with optic atrophy or hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy type VI (HMSN VI) (mutations in MFN2), and Costeff syndrome and DOA with cataract (mutations in OPA3).
This rare X-linked progressive neurodegenerative disorder, named Mohr-Tranebjaerg (MT syndrome), is caused by mutations in the DDP1 gene and includes sensorineural deafness, blindness, mental retardation and a complex movement disorder.
More recently, it was shown that this original DFN-1 family represented a new type of recessive neurodegenerative syndrome characterized by postlingual progressive sensorineural deafness as the first presenting symptom in early childhood, followed by progressive dystonia, spasticity, dysphagia, mental deterioration, paranoia and cortical blindness.
We now report small deletions in this candidate gene in the original DFN-1/MTS family, and in a family with deafness, dystonia and mental deficiency but not blindness.
Restudy of the original DFN-1 family showed that the deafness is part of a progressive X linked recessive syndrome, which includes visual disability leading to cortical blindness, dystonia, fractures, and mental deficiency.
The aim of this study was to investigate tissue factor (TF) expression, fibrin/fibrinogen and D-dimer deposition, as well as the occurrence of intravascular thrombosis (IVT) in canine intracranial meningiomas using immunohistochemistry.
Five patients (4 girls and 1 boy) with AT/RT were treated in our hospital.
Ucn3 mRNA expression was lower in pPROM with and without chorioamnionitis than in PTD.
The aim of the present study was to determine whether the expression of A disintegrin and metallproteinase 15 (ADAM15) affected the inflammatory conditions and cell migration in human fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLSs) in a rat model of rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
The therapeutic effects and side effects of ADAM15 in a rat model of collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) were examined in vivo.
In addition, treatment of CIA rats using siADAM15 significantly reduced the arthritis score and extent of joint damage in the rats.
To study the contribution of ADAM15, a disintegrin metalloproteinase that is up-regulated in the rheumatoid arthritis (RA) synovial membrane, to the characteristic resistance of RA synovial fibroblasts (RASFs) to apoptosis induction by genotoxic stress or stimulation with proapoptotic FasL, which is present at high concentrations in RA synovial fluid.
To investigate the regulation of the proteins ADAM-15 and ADAM-17 in intrauterine adhesions (IUA).
The development of IUA is associated with regulation of ADAM15 and ADAM-17, which may be potential biological markers for evaluating the severity of intrauterine adhesions.
In a mouse model of acute lung injury induced by lipopolysaccharide (LPS), upregulation of ADAM15 was observed in association with pulmonary edema and neutrophil infiltration.
However, whether and how ADAM15 contributes to atherosclerosis remains unknown.
HuR is an RNA-binding protein implicated in immune homeostasis and various cancers, including colorectal cancer.
In this study, we evaluated HuR as a small-molecule target for preventing colorectal cancer in high-risk groups such as those with familial adenomatosis polyposis (FAP) or inflammatory bowel disease (IBD).
In human specimens, levels of cytoplasmic HuR were increased in colonic epithelial cells from patients with IBD, IBD-cancer, FAP-adenoma, and colorectal cancer, but not in patients with IBD-dysplasia.
Intraperitoneal injection of the HuR small-molecule inhibitor MS-444 in AOM/DSS mice, a model of IBD and inflammatory colon cancer, augmented DSS-induced weight loss and increased tumor multiplicity, size, and invasiveness.
In contrast, HuR inhibition in APCMin mice, a model of FAP and colon cancer, diminished the number of small intestinal tumors generated.
Using a publically available database, HuR expression levels were determined to be increased in primary PDA and colorectal cancer tumor cohorts as compared with normal pancreas and colon tissues, respectively.
CRISPR/Cas9 technology was successfully used to delete the HuR gene in both PDA (MIA PaCa-2 and Hs 766T) and colorectal cancer (HCT116) cell lines.
Although not as a dramatic phenotype, CRISPR knockout HuR HCT116 colon cancer cells (HCT.HuR-KO(-/-)) showed significantly reduced in vivo tumor growth compared with controls (HCT.HuR-WT(+/+)).
Collectively, sensitization of colon carcinoma cells to radiation-induced cell death and DNA-damage by HuR knockdown critically depends on caspase-2 and may represent a valuable approach to intervene with therapy resistance of colorectal cancer (CRC).
And importantly, HuR levels were found to be highly representative in liver and colon cancer.
In summary, we report that HuR and TTP are the critical regulators of the posttranscriptional regulation of claudin-1 expression in colon cancer cells.
Four genes showed inverse correlation between methylation and gene expression; ROR1, GXYLT2, FOXA2, and, notably, RARB, a gene previously identified as a tumor suppressor in colorectal adenocarcinoma as well as breast, lung and prostate cancer.
Head and neck cancer (HNC) is the seventh most common malignancy in the world and its prevailing form, the head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), is characterized as aggressive and invasive cancer type.
Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), the most common form of HNC, develops in the oral cavity, pharynx, and larynx and is associated with tobacco exposure, alcohol abuse, and infection with oncogenic viruses.
We attempted to assess MMP-8 function in oral tongue squamous cell carcinoma (OTSCC).
We investigated the immunohistochemical expression profiles of cytokeratins (CAM5.2, AE1/AE3, CK7, CK8, CK18, and CK20), epithelial membrane antigen, SRY (sex-determining region Y)-box 9, type II collagen, runt-related transcription factor 2, and osteocalcin in clear cell chondrosarcoma and compared them with those in chondroblastoma, conventional chondrosarcoma, and osteosarcoma.
In this study we investigated the functional role of FAP-1 as a potential inhibitor of CD95 (Fas, APO-1)-mediated apoptosis in pancreatic cancer cells.
Finally, we demonstrate by immunohistochemistry that FAP-1 is strongly expressed in tumor cells from pancreatic carcinoma tissues.
Taken together, these results show that FAP-1 can protect pancreatic carcinoma cells from CD95-mediated apoptosis, probably by preventing anti-CD95-induced translocation of CD95 from intracellular stores to the cell surface.
The most striking findings were the overexpression of Fas decoy receptors (DcR3), Fas associated phosphatase-1 (FAP-1), and FLICE-inhibitory protein (c-FLIP) in the resistant cell lines as well as in pancreatic cancer surgical specimens.
This resistance correlated with high levels in pancreatic tumor cells of mRNA for FAP-1, a Fas-associated phosphatase that can block the apoptotic function of Fas.
The delineation of the phenotypic spectrum associated with mutations in ATP1A3, FOXG1, GNAO1, GRIN1, FRRS1L, and TBC1D24 is revealing an expanding genetic overlap between epileptic encephalopathies, developmental delay/intellectual disability, and hyperkinetic movement disorders,.
We confirmed a genetic diagnosis in five patients (36%): epileptic encephalopathy associated with autosomal dominant de novo variants in SCN2A (p.Met1545Val), KCNQ2 (p.Asp212Tyr), and GNAO1 (p.Gly40Arg); lipoic acid synthetase deficiency due to compound heterozygous variants in LIAS (p.Ala253Pro and p.His236Gln); and encephalopathy associated with an X-linked variant in CUL4B (p.Asn211Ser).ConclusionWES is helpful at arriving genetic diagnoses in neonatal encephalopathy and/or seizures and brain damage.
The results suggest that signaling proteins affected by EGCG in breast cancer, which include JUN, FADD, NFKB1, Bcl-2, GNAO1, and MMP14, are involved primarily in cell death and survival; DNA replication, recombination and repair; and the cell cycle.
We describe a case of GNAO1-associated epilepsy and chorea in a patient with a de novo pathogenic mutation.
The neurological phenotypes associated with GNAO1 mutations appear to lie on a spectrum, and it is possible that the c.607G&gt;A (p.Gly203Arg) variant characterizes a phenotype with both severe epilepsy and chorea.
We report the case of a 19-year-old female patient who had progressive chorea associated with a GNAO1 mutation.
After identification of a GNAO1 missense mutation at the age of 18years, topiramate treatment was initiated and the frequency of chorea decreased dramatically.
Given the side effects and complications associated with neuroleptics and deep brain stimulation, respectively, topiramate is recommended for the first-line management of severe chorea associated with a GNAO1 mutation.
In 2 unrelated patients with axial hypotonia, developmental delay and a hyperkinetic movement disorder, a missense mutation was found in codon 209 of the GNAO1 gene.
Here we report the smallest deletion involving SNURF/SNRPN that causes major symptoms of Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS), including hypotonia, dysmorphic features, intellectual disability, and obesity.
An eight-gene (C9orf64, OSMR, MDK, MARVELD1, PTRF, MYD88, BIRC3, RPP25) signature was established to divide GBM patients into two groups based on the cut-off point (27.24).
This result was associated with a reduction in the protein abundance of the lipodystrophy gene polymerase I and transcript release factor (Ptrf; Cavin) in gonadal adipose tissue.
Polymerase I and transcript release factor (PTRF) was identified as a direct target of miR-187 in the promotion of the migration of NSCLC cells.
Restored expression of PTRF neutralized the promoting effect of miR-187 on cell migration and EMT of NSCLC cells.
ice and humans lacking the caveolae component polymerase I transcription release factor (PTRF, also known as cavin-1) exhibit lipo- and muscular dystrophy.
Thus, in addition to compromised adipocyte-related physiology, the absence of PTRF/cavin-1 in mice caused a unique form of muscular dystrophy with a phenotype similar or identical to that seen in humans lacking this protein.
All four MoAbs, PAL-M2, NK1/C3, IND-1, and MAAMA against cutaneous melanoma-associated antigens stained positively all melanoma cell lines as well as the melanocytic cell line, suggesting that in vitro proliferation of melanocytes could modify their antigenic expression.
On the whole, our findings indicate that the Kras, Col5a1 and Furin genes may play essential roles in the molecular mechanisms of SMCD, which warrants further investigation.
The results suggest that PKCDelta plays a role in the regulation of Nox1-mediated oxidative stress elicited by PQ and could have a role in the pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease.
Recently, it was discovered that levels of CGB-derived peptides are decreased in the cerebrospinal fluid of multiple sclerosis (MS) patients.
Recent studies provided evidence that chromogranins can interact with mutant superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) and that chromogranin B (CgB) may act as a susceptibility gene and modifier of onset in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
The immunoreactive patterns of CgA and CgB were investigated in CJD and compared to those observed in Alzheimer's disease.
Detection of the expression of these proteins and genes encoding these proteins in human gastric cancer tissues by real-time PCR (RT-qPCR) and western blot revealed that the expression of Beta-ACTIN, LDH, DLD, PRPF19 and CaM genes were up-regulated and RanGAP was down-regulated in gastric cancer tissues and/or metastatic lymph nodes compared to peri-cancerous tissues.
Together, these studies add a new dimension to our understanding of hPrp19, and we have reason to believe that continuing excavation of this multi-faceted protein may shed light on its roles in human diseases, especially in cancer.
The mRNA and protein expression of SSTR1, SSTR2, SSTR3, SSTR4, and SSTR5 subtypes in 40 specimens of HCC and 40 specimens of liver cirrhosis were detected by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and immunohistochemistry (IHC), respectively.
The positive rates of SSTR1, SSTR2, SSTR3, SSTR4, and SSTR5 proteins were 47.5%, 70.0%, 50.0%, 65.0%, and 67.5% in HCC, and 55.0%, 67.5%, 52.5%, 60.0%, and 47.5% in liver cirrhosis tissues, respectively.
The protein levels of SSTR1, SSTR2, SSTR3, SSTR4, and SSTR5 were markedly higher in HCC than in liver cirrhosis tissues.
Flow cytometry effectively identifies major forms of PIDs, including severe combined immunodeficiency, X-linked agammaglobulinemia, hyper IgM syndromes, Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, X-linked lymphoproliferative syndrome, familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis, autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome, IPEX syndrome, CTLA 4 haploinsufficiency and LRBA deficiency, IRAK4 and MyD88 deficiencies, Mendelian susceptibility to mycobacterial disease, chronic mucocuneous candidiasis, and chronic granulomatous disease.
The association of moderate to severe eczema and elevated plasma levels of immunoglobulin E is a characteristic not only of atopic dermatitis but also of various genodermatoses: hyperimmunoglobulin E syndromes, Omenn syndrome, Netherton syndrome, peeling skin syndrome type B, severe dermatitis, multiple allergies, and metabolic wasting syndrome, Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, prolidase deficiency, Loeys-Dietz syndrome, IPEX syndrome, STAT5B deficiency, and pentasomy X.
In this review, we describe the recent advancements achieved both in vitro and at preclinical level with LVVs for the treatment of Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS), chronic granulomatous disease (CGD), ADA deficiency (ADA-SCID), Artemis deficiency, RAG1/2 deficiency, X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency (Gammachain deficiency, SCIDX1), X-linked lymphoproliferative disease (XLP) and immune dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, X-linked (IPEX) syndrome.
The common duplicated region in those three patients and the presented case comprises 12 disease-associated genes including the FOXP3 (Forkhead Box P3) and WAS (Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome) gene, both implicated in immune function.
This theory has been supported by observations in patients with primary immunodeficiencies such as the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome and IPEX (immunodysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, X-linked syndrome).
Hyper-IgE syndrome; Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome; immunodysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, X-linked (IPEX); Omenn syndrome; and atypical complete DiGeorge syndrome are primary immune deficiencies that are associated with elevated serum IgE levels.
Increased IgE levels in IPEX, Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome and Omenn syndrome are likely related to increased T(H)2 cytokine production caused by decreased a number or function of CD4(+)CD25(+)forkhead box protein P3(+) regulatory T cells.
The aim of the present study was to clarify the clinical implication and functional role of tripartite motif-59 (TRIM59) in colorectal carcinoma (CRC) and explore the underlying mechanism of aberrant high expression of TRIM59 in cancer.
Tripartite motif 59 (TRIM59) was identified from a microarray dataset of matched-samples and was verified as an aberrantly upregulated gene in NSCLC tissue.
The expression level of TRIM59 in NSCLC subtypes was observed to be significantly increased in large cell lung carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma as compared with that in adenocarcinoma.
Notably, TRIM59 demonstrated a negative correlation with survival time and its overexpression indicated a poor prognosis in NSCLC.
In conclusion, it was revealed that TRIM59 is a novel prognostic biomarker modulating oncogenic MTOR and EIF4E signaling pathways in NSCLC.
Therefore, TRIM59 may serve as an independent predictor for prognosis and a potential therapeutic target for NSCLC.
Our data showed that the mRNA level of TRIM59 in cancerous tissues was 2-fold increased as compared with non-cancerous tissues.
One member of this protein family, Trim59, has been reported as a novel biomarker for the occurrence and progression of multiple human carcinomas, such as lung cancer, gastric cancer, cervical cancer, and osteosarcoma.
In this study, we examined the expression of Trim59 in bladder cancer (Bca) specimens and cell lines, and investigated its biological roles in Bca cell lines.
Our findings also revealed that Trim59 can present oncogenic activity, and may serve as a novel candidate target for bladder carcinoma treatment.
Recently, TRIM59 has been described in multiple cancers such as gastric, prostatic and lung cancer.
In this study, we elucidated the biological roles of TRIM59 in breast cancer.
We found that TRIM59 was up-regulated in breast cancer cells.
Down-regulation of TRIM59 inhibited breast cancer cell proliferation, migration and invasion in vitro as well as tumor growth in vivo.
Taken together, our study results provided new evidence showing that TRIM59 may be considered as a promising therapeutic target for breast cancer.
Tripartite motif 59 (TRIM59) is a novel oncogenic driver in gastric cancer (GC) that is implicated in disease progression as well as dismal survival.
In this study, the effects of TRIM59 expression on tumor growth were investigated in prostate cancer.
The expression of TRIM59 in prostate cancer tissues (n = 15) and prostate cancer cell lines was determined by quantitative reverse transcriptase-PCR (qRT-PCR), Western blotting, and immunohistochemistry.
A specific shRNA targeting TRIM59 was employed to knockdown TRIM59 expression in the prostate cancer cell lines PC3 and DU145.
The effects on cell cycle progression were determined by flow cytometry, and a xenograft mouse model of prostate cancer was generated to determine the in vivo effects of TRIM59 knockdown.
TRIM59 was highly expressed in prostate cancer tissues.
Our study suggests that TRIM59 promotes prostate cancer cell proliferation, possibly through its effects on cell cycle progression.
In this study, the effects of TRIM59 expression on cell proliferation and migration were investigated in human cervical cancer cells.
The expression of TRIM59 in clinical cervical cancer tissues and cervical cancer cells was initially determined by RT-PCR and Western blot.
Specific shRNA against TRIM59 was then employed to knock down the expression of TRIM59 in cervical cancer lines HeLa and SiHa.
Our results showed that the expression of TRIM59 was significantly elevated in cervical cancers.
Knockdown of TRIM59 significantly inhibited cell proliferation and colony formation as well as cell migration and invasion abilities in cervical cancer HeLa and SiHa cells.
These data suggest that TRIM59 is a potential target that promotes the progression of cervical cancer.
In order to assess the risk of complete AV block in patients with intraventricular conduction disturbances who undergo general anesthesia, 20 patients with various conduction defects (7 LBBB, 1 RBBB and 1st degree AV block, 1 incomplete RBBB, 9 RBBB + LAH and 2 RBBB + LPH) were studied by means of His bundle recording and corrected sinus node recovery time (CSNRT) before and after the subministration of thiopental (0.2 g I.V.
The preoperative investigation showed prolonged HV-time in three cases and Wenckebach block at 110 ppm in one case, while six patients had LAH-block, five RBB-block and two first degree AV-block.
The most frequent electrographic abnormalities included: decrease in ST, LAH and atrio-ventricular block of the I degree.
Isolated RBBB was present in 6,3% of cases; both RBBB and LAH or LPH in 3,4%; isolated LAH in 5,8%; LBBB in 3%; suspect blocks of the three brances [RBBB+LAH+first degree atrio-ventricular block (AVB), or LBBB+first degree AVB] in 2,9% of cases.
The overall prevalence of RBBB+LAH was 3.3% compared to 1.6% for RBBB+LPH, and complete atrioventricular block was seen in 36% of the former and 66% of the latter.
All presented advanced RBBB and sinus rhythm; in the immediate postoperative period, one presented complete transitory A-V block which required a stand by pacemaker; in 2 cases there was a first degree AV block; in two other, LAH and LPH.
In the LAH + RBBB group, there was a higher mortality rate and frequent evolution toward complete A-V block.
S100 calcium-binding protein A9, annexin A3, nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase, carboxylesterase 2 and calcium activated chloride channel A1 were probably potential biomarkers of colorectal cancer.
We previously showed that calgranulin B levels are increased in the stools of colorectal cancer patients.
In patient tumor tissues, calgranulin B protein levels correlated with the presence of stromal inflammatory cells surrounding tumor cells, and calgranulin B promoter methylation was observed in both paired human tissues and colon cancer cell lines.
Cell lines did not express calgranulin B, but in vitro studies showed that colon cancer cells internalized extracellular calgranulin B, while other types of cancer cells did not.
Our findings demonstrate the antitumor effects of calgranulin B in the inflammatory microenvironment and suggest that calgranulin B could be potentially efficacious in the treatment of colon cancer.
We assessed the clinical usefulness of calgranulin B as a stool marker for colorectal cancer in a pilot study of patients with colorectal cancer.
We checked the calgranulin B in stools from 77 colorectal cancer patients and from 75 controls by western blot and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.
Fecal calgranulin A did not show any difference, but stool calgranulin B of colorectal cancer patients was significantly higher than controls [50.6 ng/mg stool protein (SD, 34.8) vs. 20.2 ng/mg stool protein (SD,24.0), respectively, P &lt; 0.001).
Calgranulin B was increased in stools of colorectal cancer patients but our results suggest that colorectal cancer screening by determination of stool calgranulin B would not be better than conventional fecal occult blood test.
Calgranulin B was upregulated in colorectal cancer, and hepatoma-derived aldose reductase-like protein was reexpressed in a rat model during hepatocarcinogenesis.
The most interesting new members of the chromo superfamily are Drosophila male-specific lethal (MSL-3) protein involved in the X chromosome gene dosage compensation in the males and human retinoblastoma-binding protein RBP-1.
To evaluate variants in the LRPAP1, CTSH, LEPREL1, ZNF644, SLC39A5, and SCO2 genes in 298 unrelated patients with early-onset high myopia (eoHM).
The ZNF644 gene showed five heterozygous missense mutations (c.1106A&gt;T, p.K369M; c.1648G&gt;A, p.A550T; c.2014A&gt;G, p.S672G; c.2048G&gt;C, p.R683T, and c.2551G&gt;C, p.D851H) in five families, but the c.1106A&gt;T, (p.K369M) and c.1648G&gt;A, (p.A550T) in ZNF644 did not co-segregated with high myopia in the families and should be excluded as causative mutations.
To investigate the association of ZNF644, GRM6 and CTNND2 genes with high myopia in Jiangsu Chinese population.
ZNF644-rs358695 was associated with high myopia (P = 0.03).
ZNF644 gene mutation was associated with high myopia.
ZNF644 gene may play a role in the development of high myopia.
In this study, we investigated the mutation spectrum of ZNF644, a causative gene for autosomal dominant high myopia, in a high-myopia cohort from a Chinese population.
ZNF644 is associated with high myopia in a cohort from a Chinese population.
ZNF644 mutations have a minor contribution to the genetic etiology of high myopia.
Recent advances in whole exome sequencing technology show promise for further elucidation of disease causing variants as in the recent identification of rare variants within ZNF644 segregating with pathological myopia.
A recent study implicated zinc finger protein 644 isoform 1 (ZNF644) variants with non-syndromic high-grade myopia in a Chinese-Asian population.
Herein we focused on investigating the role for ZNF644 variants in high-grade myopia in a United States (US) cohort.
DNA from a case cohort of 131 subject participants diagnosed with high-grade myopia was screened for ZNF644 variants.
Our study has identified two novel variants in ZNF644 associated with high-grade myopia in a US cohort.
Our results suggest that ZNF644 may play a role in myopia development.
After we performed sequencing analysis of the exons in the ZNF644 gene in 300 sporadic cases of high myopia, we identified an additional five mutations (I587V, R680G, C699Y, 3'UTR+12 C&gt;G, and 3'UTR+592 G&gt;A) in 11 different patients.
Given that ZNF644 is predicted to be a transcription factor that may regulate genes involved in eye development, mutation may cause the axial elongation of eyeball found in high myopia patients.
Our results suggest that ZNF644 might be a causal gene for high myopia in a monogenic form.
We hypothesized that Nrf2 modulates progression from acute tubular damage to renal fibrosis.
We asked whether Nrf2 deletion increases renal injury in mice following unilateral ureteral obstruction (UUO).
We studied Nrf2 in renal biopsies of patients with acute, subacute and chronic tubulointerstitial nephritis (TIN).
The aim of this study was to evaluate the effects of resistance exercise programs on the expression of transcription factors Nrf2 and nuclear factor KB (NF-KB) in CKD patients on hemodialysis (HD).
In conclusion, these data suggest that resistance exercises seem to be capable of inducing Nrf2 activation in CKD patients on HD.
Activate Nrf2 could inhibit the activation of NLRP3 inflammasome in acute liver injury and severe lupus nephritis.
Here, we show that the loss of Nrf2 suppresses fibrosis and inflammation in a unilateral ureter obstruction (UUO) model of CKD in mice.
These results demonstrate that Nrf2-related inflammasome activation can promote CKD symptoms via infiltration of M1 macrophages.
Thus, we have identified the Nrf2 pathway as a promising therapeutic target for CKD.
Reduced nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (NRF2) pathway activity was reported in models of chronic kidney disease (CKD).
[Purpose] The aim of this study was to examine the agreement between physiotherapists (PTs) and mothers (Ms) about the treatment of children with cerebral palsy (CP) who received treatment in special education and rehabilitation centers.
The purpose of this study was to evaluate the impact of a multifaceted knowledge translation intervention, using PTs as knowledge brokers (KBs) to facilitate the use in clinical practice of four evidence-based measurement tools designed to evaluate and understand motor function in children with cerebral palsy (CP).
In this study, interaction between eight Swedish children with cerebral palsy, mean age 8.6 years, and their physiotherapists (PTs) and speech-language therapists (SLTs) was analysed during intervention across 16 dyads.
A case of inherited homozygous complement C3 deficiency (C3D) in a patient with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and the molecular basis for this deficiency are reported.
Our previous studies indicate that uPA and uPAR expression increase in the ischemic brain during the recovery phase from an acute ischemic injury and that uPA binding to uPAR promotes neurological recovery after an acute ischemic stroke.
The data reviewed here indicate that the uPA-uPAR-LRP1 system is a potential target for the development of therapeutic strategies to promote neurological recovery in acute ischemic stroke patients.
We report that cerebral cortical neurons release uPA during the recovery phase from ischemic stroke in vivo or hypoxia in vitro.
Treatment with recombinant uPA after ischemic stroke induces neurological recovery in wild-type and uPA(-/-) but not in uPAR(-/-) mice.
This study reports of the Interactive Learning and Action (ILA) approach, a methodology for agricultural innovation which has been adapted to the context of HIV/AIDS.
Interference with the 4-1BB-4-1BBL pathway may be of therapeutic use in the treatment of HIV infection.
A negative correlation between the WHO degree of malignancy and the strength of expression was identified on both transcriptional and translational level for AOX1, GSTM3 and GSTP1, although the results could have been biased by the prevalence of meningiomas and glioblastomas in the inevitably bipolar distribution of the WHO grades.
A correlation between the gene expression and the protein product was observed for AOX1, GSTP1 and GSTM3 in astrocytomas.
In addition, 5 features, including the expression of the putative biomarkers SNTN and AOX1, were selected to differentiate between normal, SBOT, and serous ovarian carcinoma groups.
We previously reported that upregulation of NAD(P)H:quinone oxidoreductase 1 (NQO1) in cholangiocarcinoma (CCA; a fatal bile duct cancer) was associated with poor prognosis.
This study aimed to evaluate the association between the immunohistochemical expression of NAD(P) H:quinone oxidoreductase-1 (NQO1) and nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) in resected specimens of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (ICC) and to elucidate the prognostic value of NQO1 and Nrf2 expression.
The aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of inflammation on NAD(P)H: quinone oxidoreductase-1 (NQO1), the xenobiotic metabolizing and antioxidant enzyme protecting cells against electrophiles and reactive oxygen species in biliary cancer (cholangiocarcinoma) cells.
Human cholangiocarcinoma cell line, KKU-OCA17 and HeLa Chang liver cells were treated with inflammatory cytokine combinations (interferon-gamma, interleukin-1beta and tumor necrosis factor-alpha) for 48 h before NQO1 activity was assayed.
Building on these investigations, the present study had two goals: first, to develop a method for inducing voluntary ethanol intake in individual zebrafish, which can be used as a model in future studies to examine how this behavior is affected by various manipulations, and second, to characterize the effects of this ethanol intake on different behaviors and the expression of hypothalamic orexigenic peptides, galanin (GAL) and orexin (OX), which are known in rodents to stimulate consumption of ethanol and alter behaviors associated with alcohol abuse.
The neuropeptide galanin has been shown to modulate opiate dependence and withdrawal.
In this study, we used several transgenic mouse lines to further define the mechanisms underlying the role played by galanin and its receptors in the modulation of morphine dependence.
Galanin opposes the actions of morphine which leads to opiate dependence and withdrawal, an effect that is mediated via GalR1.
The neuropeptide galanin and its three receptor subtypes (GalR1-3) are expressed in the central amygdala (CeA), a brain region involved in stress- and anxiety-related behaviors, as well as alcohol dependence.
Galanin also has been suggested to play a role in alcohol intake and alcohol dependence.
Therefore, niacin was effective against iodoacetamide-induced colitis through ameliorating pathologic angiogenesis and inflammatory changes in a GPR109A-dependent manner.
Reversely, AA alleviates obesity-related disorders via rescuing anti-inflammatory and butyrate-producing microbiota, up-regulating GPR41 and GPR109A and controlling hypothalamic inflammation in female.
As such, these three metabolite receptors play a critical role in cancer and represent a new class of drug targets with selective antagonists of GPR81 and GPR91 for cancer treatment and agonists of GPR109A for cancer prevention.
In present study, global metabolic profiling with ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography coupled to quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometry (UHPLC-QTOF/MS) combined with pattern recognition method was performed to discover the underlying hematopoietic regulation mechanisms of DG, CX and GX on hemolytic and aplastic anemia rats (HAA) induced by acetyl phenylhydrazine (APH) and cyclophosphamide (CP).
We demonstrate the utility of these PET-SERRS nanoparticles in several proof-of-concept studies including lymph node (LN) tracking, intraoperative guidance for LN resection, and cancer imaging after intravenous injection.
Background: Synovial sarcoma (SyS) is a rare malignancy that typically invades the extremities and occurs predominantly in adolescents.
The unique spectral signatures and biologically inert compositions of surface-enhanced resonance Raman scattering (SERRS) nanoparticles make them promising contrast agents for in vivo cancer imaging.
administration of SERRS nanoparticles such that delineation of cancerous lesions can be achieved in vivo and ex vivo on resected tissues without the need for specific biomarker targeting.
The sensitization enhancement ratios (SERs) calculated by a multitarget single-hit model were 1.62, 1.37, and 1.21 corresponding to the treatments of GNPs, GNSs, and GNRs, respectively, demonstrating that the GNPs showed a higher anticancer efficiency than both GNSs and GNRs upon X-ray irradiation.
We demonstrated the performance of the PB-based SERRS tags for high-sensitivity immunoassay and cancer cell imaging.
We devised a method that employs folate receptor (FR)-targeted surface-enhanced resonance Raman scattering (SERRS) nanoparticles (NPs), as folate receptors are typically overexpressed in ovarian cancer.
Here we demonstrate a novel application of 'surface enhanced resonance Raman scattering nanoparticles' (SERRS NPs) for imaging breast cancer lung metastases with much higher precision than currently feasible.
Successful detection and delineation of pulmonary micrometastatic lesions as small as 200 mym, corroborated by histology, immunohistochemistry, and bioluminescence imaging confirmed the suitability of both TF as a target and AlfaTF-SERRS-NPs as an effective contrast agent for imaging breast cancer lung metastases.
Six process and intermediate outcome indicators, representing screening for breast and colorectal cancer and care for patients with diabetes and cardiovascular disease, were selected and analyzed for change over time (2003-2009) in overall performance, as well as the difference between the lowest and the highest socio-economic ranks (SERs) and Arab and non-Arab members.
Here we explored the ability of integrin-targeted surface-enhanced resonance Raman spectroscopy (SERRS) nanoparticles to depict the true tumor extent in a GBM mouse model that closely mimics the pathology in humans.
The oxytocin receptor (OXTR) is a key regulator of stress and anxiety and may be regulated by both psychosocial risk factors and gonadal hormones, making it an attractive candidate for study in postpartum depression (PPD).
Maternal history of major depressive disorder during children's lives was associated with children's sensitivity in detecting emotional faces among children homozygous for the OXTR rs53576 G allele, but not among carriers of the A allele.
In sum, HPS2 is the result of the absence of the entire AP-3 complex, which results in severe neutropenia with a defect in granule formation as the major hematological finding.
Syndromic variants of congenital neutropenia may be due to mutations in genes controlling glucose metabolism (SLC37A4, G6PC3) or lysosomal function (LYST, RAB27A, ROBLD3/p14, AP3B1, VPS13B).
We now report 2 unrelated subjects with HPS2 who show a characteristic clinical phenotype of oculocutaneous albinism, platelet and T-lymphocyte dysfunction and neutropenia.
A canine form of cyclic neutropenia corresponds to human Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome type 2 (HPS2) and results from mutations in AP3B1 encoding a subunit of a complex involved in the subcellular trafficking of vesicular cargo proteins (among which NE appears to be one).
To clarify the functions of S. cerevisiae Sgs1 and to get an insight into the functions of Blm, Wrn and Rts, in this study, we analyzed the phenotype of sgs1 disruptant and in detail the cause of the poor sporulation phenotype of sgs1 disruptants in relation to meiotic processes including meiotic recombination.
In this study, using colon cancer as an example, we provide both in vitro (cell culture) and in vivo (chemically induced mouse model of colon cancer) evidence that this profound antineoplastic action may be associated with aspirin's ability to irreversibly inhibit COX-1-mediated platelet activation, thereby blocking platelet-cancer cell interactions, which promote cancer cell number and invasive potential.
Data clearly showed that COX-1 was required for maintenance of malignant characteristics of colon cancer cells or tumor promoter-induced transformation of preneoplastic cells.
We genotyped candidate polymorphisms and tag SNPs in PTGS1 (COX-1) and PTGS2 (COX-2) in a population-based case-control study (Diet, Activity and Lifestyle Study, DALS) of colon cancer (n = 1,470 cases/1,837 controls) and rectal cancer (n = 583/775), and independently among cases and controls from the Colon Cancer Family Registry (CCFR; colon n = 959/1,535, rectal n = 505/839).
Genotype-NSAID interactions were observed in the DALS for PTGS1 and rectal cancer risk and for PTGS2 and colon cancer risk, but were no longer significant after correcting for multiple comparisons and did not replicate in the CCFR.
We observed interactions and statistically significant increases in colon cancer risk for low docosahexaenoic acid intake among those with the PTGS1 rs10306110 (-1,053 A &gt; G) variant genotypes (OR = 1.6, 95 % confidence interval = 1.1-2.3, adj.
Analogous with cystic fibrosis CFTR p.Phe508del, screening for RSPH9 p.Lys268del (which lacks sentinel dextrocardia) in those at risk would help in early diagnosis, tailored clinical management, genetic counselling and primary prevention.
The HSPC069/HYPB gene was originally isolated from the human hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells (HSPCs), and it was also identified as a huntingtin interacting protein, implicated in the pathogenesis of Huntington disease (HD).
We also found that the nucleus PLAC2 bind with STAT1 and interact with RPL36 promoters but the cytoplasmic lncRNA PLAC2 inhibited STAT1 nuclear transfer, thereby decreasing RP36 expression, inhibiting cell proliferation and inducing cell cycle arrest.
Real-time RT-PCR results showed that the overall direction of differential expression was consistent except COL17A1.CXCL8 interacted with STAT1, CCL27, and IGF1R targeted by hsa-miR-375, and COL17A1 targeted by RP11-361L15.4 might function in the development and progression of melanoma, which should be verified by more detailed experiments.
We found that unconjugated lithocholic acid (LCA) impedes Th1 activation as measured by i) decreased production of the Th1 cytokines IFNGamma and TNFAlfaAlfa, ii) decreased expression of the Th1 genes T-box protein expressed in T cells (T-bet), Stat-1 and Stat4, and iii) decreased STAT1Alfa/Beta phosphorylation.
Once internalized into pancreatic cancer cells, the elevated lysosomal cathepsin B could further promote the release of GEM.
These micelles afforded protection to gemcitabine from plasma metabolism as evident by negligible amount of gemcitabine and its metabolite dFdU detected in the plasma after 24 h. A controlled release of gemcitabine from the micelles was observed with 53.89% drug release in 10 days in the presence of protease enzyme Cathepsin B. Gemcitabine conjugated micelles were cytotoxic, showed internalization, and induced cell apoptosis in MIA PaCa-2 and L3.6pl pancreatic cancer cell lines.
Further, our results showed that MUC1-c protects pancreatic cancer cells from cell death by stabilizing lysosomes and preventing release of Cathepsin B in the cytosol.
To observe the effects of electroacupuncture (EA) on cochlea morphology and expression of aquaporin 1 (AQP1) in guinea pigs with endolymphatic hydrops, so as to explore the possible mechanism of EA on endolymphatic hydrops.
EA could relieve the endolymphatic hydrops in guinea pigs; the mechanism is likely to be related with up-regulating the expression of AQP1 in cochlea and ion concentration might be an important factor involved.
The aim of this study was to explore the pathological changes in water homeostasis and the effects of glucocorticoids on aquaporin-1 (AQP1) in guinea pigs with otitis media with effusion (OME).
mRNA was extracted from the surgically acquired utricles from subjects with Meniere's disease and acoustic neuroma to conduct quantitative real-time reverse transcription with polymerase chain reaction for AQP1, AQP4, and AQP6.
Expression of AQP1, AQP4, or AQP6 mRNA did not differ in vestibular endorgans from patients with Meniere's disease.
To explore the pathological change of water homeostasis in the secretory otitis media (SOM) middle ear, we observed the expression and regulation of aquaporin 1 (AQP1) in the SOM middle ear cavity.
Clinical, cytogenetic and molecular features of acute myeloid leukemia with a MLL-SEPT5 fusion gene are reviewed.
We report on an adult patient with de novo acute myeloid leukemia (AML) with a t(11;22)(q23;q11.2) involving CDCREL1 and MLL genes.
Fifty-four individuals (17 normal-weight; 18 overweight; 19 individuals with obesity) completed two food-based go/no-go tasks (one with high- and one with low-calorie foods as no-go stimuli), once during ERP data acquisition and once during fMRI data acquisition.
Interestingly, incubation of BSM cells with asthma-associated cytokines, such as interleukin-13 (IL-13), IL-17, and tumor necrosis factor-Alfa (TNF-Alfa), caused up-regulations of RhoA and CPI-17 in BSM cells of naive animals and cultured human BSM cells.
Results also revealed an overexpression of CPI-17 protein in lung biopsies derived from patients with asthma.
Mutations in the ROMK1 potassium channel gene (KCNJ1) cause antenatal/neonatal Bartter syndrome type II (aBS II), a renal disorder that begins in utero, accounting for the polyhydramnios and premature delivery that is typical in affected infants, who develop massive renal salt wasting, hypokalaemic metabolic alkalosis, secondary hyperreninaemic hyperaldosteronism, hypercalciuria and nephrocalcinosis.
The key symptoms, such as polyhydramnios secondary to fetal polyuria, postnatal volume depletion with hypotension, iso- or hyposthenuria, hyperprostaglandinuria and hypercalciuria followed by hypokalemic alkalosis secondary to hyperaldosteronism, are typical features of loop disorders that are restricted to TAL, such as in disorders with NKCC2 and ROMK mutations.
Immunomorphological and biochemical study of the myoglobin in the myocardium of 118 males at the age of from 30 to 55 years who died suddenly from coronary insufficiency, chronic pulmonary-cardiac insufficiency and from alcoholic cardiomyopathy in Magadan and Moscow is described.
Almost two-fold decrease of the myoglobin concentration in the left ventricle without its visible hypertrophy was observed in alcoholic cardiomyopathy, this may serve as a complementary test in the diagnosis of this disease.
To observe the effect of manual acupuncture intervention on serotonin transporter (5-HTT), 5-HT 1 A receptor (5-HT1AR), norepinephrine (NE) alpha receptor 2 (NEAlfa2R) protein of brain tissues in rats with post-stroke depression (PSD).
Acupuncture can improve the locomotor function changes in stroke rats with depression after stroke, which may be associated with its effects in suppressing the up-regulated cortical ACh, GABA, Glu contents, the expression levels of 5-HT1AR and NEAlfa2R proteins in the hippocampus, raphe nucleus and LC, and the down-regulated 5-HT and NE contents in the cerebral cortex and 5-HTT protein expression levels in the hippocampus, raphe nucleus and LC.
In contrast to the effect in a transient ischemia model, the pretreatment effect did not depend on the 5HT1A receptor.
Urapidil (Eupressyl((R))) an antihypertensive drug acting as an Alfa1 antagonist and a 5-HT1A agonist, may be of special interest in the treatment of hypertension associated with preeclamptic toxaemia and hypoxia-induced pulmonary arterial vasoconstriction.
These data suggest that preventing permeability changes at the BBB could represent an as yet unrecognized mechanism of CBD-induced neuroprotection in ischaemic stroke, a mechanism mediated by activation of PPARGamma and 5-HT1A receptors.
The hypothermia as well as the suppression of the locomotion and the hypertension could be reversed by the blockade of 5-HT1A receptors with WAY 100635.
For NMP22, regardless of the exclusion criteria they were 72 and 34 % and after exclusion of urinary tract infection (UTI) or prior to manipulation 46 and 86 %, respectively.
There is evidence that nuclear matrix protein 22 (NMP22) is influenced by urinary tract infection and instrumented urinary sampling (IUS).
Further, we evaluated the usefulness of Bladder Chek NMP22 in patients with benign diseases such as cystitis, urolithiasis, and benign prostate hyperplasia (BPH) and examined how blood cells in urine samples affect the results of Bladder Chek NMP22.
In 36 cystitis, 20 urolithiasis, and 19 BPH patients, the positive rates of Bladder Chek NMP22 were 58.3, 25.0 and 5.5%, respectively.
Pristane-induced lupus (PIL) was aggravated in 2 mouse strains with impaired induction of NET formation, i.e., NOX2-deficient (Ncf1-mutated) and peptidyl arginine deiminase 4-deficient (PAD4-deficient) mice, as seen from elevated levels of antinuclear autoantibodies (ANAs) and exacerbated glomerulonephritis.
Areas covered: We will review animal studies on the biochemical and behavioral roles of DARPP-32 in drug addiction, schizophrenia and Parkinson's disease.
High fat diet-induced activation of insulin receptor substrate 1/Forkhead box protein O1 (IRS1/FOXO1), Janus kinase 2 gene/signal transducer and activator of transcription (JAK2/STAT3) and Protein Kinase B/Glycogen synthase kinase 3 beta (AKT/GSK3Beta) pathways in liver was inhibited by actein, a potential mechanism by which hyperinsulinemia, hyperleptindemia and dyslipidemia were attenuated.
Furthermore, using the stimulus Poly(I: C), ODN2006, R848, and lipopolysaccharide (LPS) as well as the viral pathogens DTMUV, H9N2 avian influenza virus (AIV), and gosling plague virus (GPV) to treat goose peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) for 6 h, goOASL transcripts level was significantly upregulated in all treated groups.
Among them, the gene encoding 2'-5' oligoadenylate synthetase-like (OASL) underwent the greatest upregulation and was also shown to be upregulated in M. leprae-infected human macrophage cell lineages, primary monocytes, and skin lesion specimens from patients with a disseminated form of leprosy.
In addition, transduced DCs inhibited CD8+ T response to ChgA stimulation, and ameliorated the severity of diabetes.
To compare blood pressure readings obtained with two commonly used oscillometric monitors: Omron HEM 711 AC (OM) and Welch-Allyn 52000 series NIBP/oximeter (WA) with mercury sphygmomanometers (Merc) in subjects with atrial fibrillation.
Dysregulation of orexin signaling may contribute to behavioral problems and hyperphagia seen in PWS and we sought to assess orexin A levels in PWS relative to controls children.
Morning fasting plasma orexin A levels were analyzed in 23 children (aged 5-11 years) with genetically confirmed PWS and 18 age and gender matched healthy unrelated siblings without PWS.
Plasma orexin A levels were significantly higher (P &lt; 0.006) in children with PWS (average +/-SD = 1,028 pg/ml +/- 358) compared with unrelated siblings (average +/-SD = 609 pg/ml +/- 351; P &lt; 0.001).
Orexin A levels correlated with age in females and were significantly elevated in PWS even after these effects were controlled.
These findings support the hypothesis that dysregulation of orexin signaling may contribute to behavioral problems and hyperphagia in PWS.
Further studies are warranted to better understand the complex relationship between orexin A levels and the problematic behaviors consistently found in individuals with PWS.
Dysregulation of orexin signaling may contribute to behavioral problems and hyperphagia seen in PWS and we sought to assess orexin A levels in PWS relative to controls children.
Morning fasting plasma orexin A levels were analyzed in 23 children (aged 5-11 years) with genetically confirmed PWS and 18 age and gender matched healthy unrelated siblings without PWS.
Plasma orexin A levels were significantly higher (P &lt; 0.006) in children with PWS (average +/-SD = 1028 pg/ml +/- 358) compared with unrelated siblings (average +/-SD = 609 pg/ml +/- 351; P &lt; 0.001).
Orexin A levels correlated with age in females and were significantly elevated in PWS even after these effects were controlled.
These findings support the hypothesis that dysregulation of orexin signaling may contribute to behavioral problems and hyperphagia in PWS.
Further studies are warranted to better understand the complex relationship between orexin A levels and the problematic behaviors consistently found in individuals with PWS.
However, reports showing cerebrospinal fluid orexin levels in Prader-Willi syndrome patients have been limited.
The aim of this study was to examine the relationship between the characteristic symptoms of Prader-Willi syndrome and cerebrospinal fluid orexin levels.
We clinically identified 14 Prader-Willi syndrome patients and examined their cerebrospinal fluid orexin levels.
Cerebrospinal fluid orexin levels (median [25-75 percentiles]) in the 14 Prader-Willi syndrome patients were intermediate (192 [161-234.5] pg/ml), higher than in the narcoleptic patients, but lower than in the idiopathic hypersomnia patients.
There was also a negative correlation between Epworth sleepiness scale scores and orexin levels in Prader-Willi syndrome patients.
Decreased cerebrospinal fluid orexin levels in Prader-Willi syndrome may play an important role in severity of obesity and excessive daytime sleepiness.
Further research is needed to evaluate the contribution of the upper airway resistance syndrome in the pathogenesis of EDS, the role of the alterations of sleep microstructure, the relationships between PWS and narcoleptic phenotype, the involvement of orexin/hypocretin, and the effects of drugs acting on REM sleep and/or wakefulness.
Quantitative RT-PCR for SAG, OXTR, STAR, HCRT, and HTR2B using RNA isolated from their lymphoblastoid cells and available brain tissue (frontal cortex) from separate individuals with PWS and control subjects and normalized to GAPD gene expression levels validated our microarray gene expression data.
In addition to excessive daytime sleepiness, Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) patients may show narcolepsy-like symptoms, such as sleep-onset rapid eye movement sleep and cataplexy, independent of obesity-related sleep disturbances, which suggests a disorder of the hypocretin neurons.
We hypothesized that the narcolepsy-like symptoms in PWS are caused by a decline in the number of hypocretin neurons.
There was no significant difference in the total number of hypocretin-containing neurons among the seven PWS patients (in whom sufficient hypothalamic material was available to quantify total cell number) and seven age-matched controls, either in adults or in infants.
We conclude that a decrease in the number of hypocretin neurons does not play a major role in the occurrence of narcolepsy-like symptoms in PWS.
Four patients with clinically and genetically confirmed Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) underwent nocturnal polysomnograpy (PSG), multiple sleep latency test (MSLT), human leukocyte antigens (HLA) typing and estimation of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) hypocretin-1 (Hcrt-1) level to investigate if a role of hypothalamic dysfunction and sleep disturbance might be functionally connected through the hypocretin (orexin) system.
Furthermore, the cell-matrix Rho GTPase-encoding ARHGAP26 gene, and MAN1C1, a gene encoding a Golgi mannosidase involved in the maturation of procollagens, emerged as new candidate uterine leiomyoma genes affecting both risk and tumor size.
Despite their clinical activity in many patients with CML, the BCR-ABL kinase inhibitors (BCR-ABL-KIs) imatinib, dasatinib, and nilotinib provide only transient leukemia reduction in patients with Ph+ ALL.
Here, we have interrogated the expression of PIP4K2B in a cohort (489) of patients with breast tumor using immunohistochemical staining and by a meta-analysis of gene expression profiles from 2,999 breast tumors, both with associated clinical outcome data.
High expression of TCN1 have been reported in neoplasms such as breast cancer and hepatocellular carcinoma.
The vitamin B12 (B12)-binding protein haptocorrin (HC) has proven to be a potentially useful biomarker in patients with fibrolamellar hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
Of 37 patients with histologically verified hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) from Bangkok, Thailand, 34 had raised values of plasma cobalamin, and 1 presented with a markedly increased value of plasma transcobalamin I (TC I).
A 12 year old girl with a localised fibrolamellar hepatoma had a raised serum unsaturated vitamin B12 binding capacity (UBBC) and transcobalamin I (TCI) prior to complete resection and chemotherapy.
These findings suggest that determination of R-binder in liver tumours may be of some value in differentiating hepatocellular carcinomas and cholangiocarcinoma, and that synthesis of R-binder by tumour cells causes an increase in serum transcobalamin I.
Bilateral phaeochromocytoma was histologically recorded from a primigravida and primipara, 22 years of ager, who had died 13 hours after precipitate spontaneous birth of a living mature child.
We discovered a new spontaneous recessive microphthalmos mouse mutant in the Japanese wild-derived inbred strain KOR1/Stm.
While the Lupus antigen (La)-related protein 7 (LARP7) is a constitutive component, the methylphosphate capping enzyme (MePCE) associates secondarily to phosphorylate the 5' end of 7SK snRNA.
As a result, a novel heterozygous HAND2 mutation, p.L47P, was identified in a patient with tetralogy of Fallot (TOF).
The persistence of new enhancing T1 hypointense lesions (acute black holes, ABHs) in multiple sclerosis (MS) cannot be predicted visually at lesion onset.
In an infant patient with sensorineural hearing loss, psychomotor retardation, and epilepsy, WES resulted in identification of a novel homozygous CLPP frameshift mutation (c.21delA).
The three examples of clinical and genetic complexities are drawn from studies of (i) Pendred syndrome/DFNB4 (PDS, OMIM 274600), (ii) Perrault syndrome (deafness and infertility) due to mutations of CLPP (PRTLS3, OMIM 614129), and (iii) the unexplained extensive clinical variability associated with TBC1D24 mutations.
Recessive CLPP mutations were recently observed in the human Perrault variant of ovarian failure and sensorineural hearing loss.
This closely linked but distinct nonsyndromic hearing loss locus was designated DFNB81.
Both the bloodstream and procyclic forms of T. brucei showed a several-fold greater sensitivity than the mammalian cells to GA and also to 17-AAG, a less toxic derivative of GA, suggesting that Hsp90 could be a potential chemotherapeuric target for African trypanosomiasis.
In the period from 1999 till 2009 there were 18 patients (14 women and 4 men) with adenomas of the parathyroid gland (PTG).
One adenoma of PTG was found in 17 patients, in one woman there were two adenomas on both sides of the trachea, but they were diagnosed not at once.
The histopathologic result showed hyperplasia or an adenoma of the reimplanted parathyroid gland (PTG) particles.
In 6 patients persistent PHPT was associated with hyperplasia of parathyroid glands (PTG), in 1 -- with adenoma of PTG missed during the first surgery.
Using immunohistochemistry for CD34, LYVE-1 (specific markers for vascular and lymphatic endothelium, respectively), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-A, VEGF-C, and fibroblast growth factor (FGF)-2, this study analyzes microvascular density (MVD), lymphatic vascular density (LVD), and expression of angiogenic and lymphangiogenic growth factors in 13 normal PTG, 77 parathyroid adenomas (PTA), and 17 primary parathyroid hyperplasia (PPH).
In PT adenomas, scores of VDR and CaSR were markedly lower than in normal PTGs (P&lt;0.01), while the proportion of Ki67-positive cells in PT adenomas was significantly higher than in normal PTGs (P&lt;0.01).
We compared the degrees of cell maturity, antigenicity and secretory function of parathyroid tissues (PTG) from cadavers (C-PTG), 20-28 week fetuses (F-PTG) and PTG adenomas (A-PTG).
The authors compared the degrees of cell maturity, antigenicity and secretory function of parathyroid (PTG) tissues from cadavers (C-PTG), 20-28 wk fetus (F-PTG) and PTG adenoma (A-PTG).
IL-32 is increasingly recognized to be an important host-protective molecule against tuberculosis.
Silencing of interleukin-32 (IL-32) in a differentiated human promonocytic cell line impairs killing of Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB) but the role of IL-32 in vivo against MTB remains unknown.
The lungs of patients with tuberculosis showed increased IL-32 expression, particularly in macrophages of granulomas and airway epithelial cells but also B cells and T cells.
IL-32 induced the vitamin D-dependent antimicrobial peptides cathelicidin and DEFB4 and to generate antimicrobial activity in vitro, dependent on the presence of adequate 25-hydroxyvitamin D. In addition, the IL-15-induced defense response macrophage gene network was integrated with ranked pairwise comparisons of gene expression from five different clinical data sets of latent compared with active tuberculosis or healthy controls and a coexpression network derived from gene expression in patients with tuberculosis undergoing chemotherapy.
Together, these analyses identified eight common genes, including IL-32, as molecular markers of latent tuberculosis and the IL-15-induced gene network.
As maintaining M. tuberculosis in a latent state and preventing transition to active disease may represent a form of host resistance, these results identify IL-32 as one functional marker and potential correlate of protection against active tuberculosis.
CFs-CoPc/PMS system could effectively decolorize azo dyes such as Acid Red 1 (AR1) with almost 100% decolorization efficiency in 35 min, suggesting that the CFs-CoPc/PMS system was a highly efficient oxidation process.
In addition to raised creatinine phosphokinase (CPK) levels, his biochemical profile showed hypothyroidism.
Myopathy is a known complication of hypothyroidism, commonly characterized by an elevation in Creatine Kinase (CPK) due to increase capillary permeability proportional to the hypothyroid state.
The decreased serum levels of triiodothyroinine (T3) and thyroxine (T4) in hypothyroid patients is well established but whether there is any correlation of creatinephosphokinase (CPK) with hypothyroidism is not well established.
To determine serum CPK variation based on TSH e free T4 (FT4), and to assess serum CPK in pathological states of the thyroid (hyperthyroidism and hypothyroidism), in relation to the euthyroidism.
From the total of results analyzed, 586 (9.4%) were measures of hyperthyroidism, with a median (range) of CPK of 98 U/L (27 to 1,113), and 556 (8.9%) were of hypothyroidism, with CPK of 114 U/L (25-4,182).
CPK was lower in the group with hyperthyroidism, and greater in that with hypothyroidism.
We have previously shown that ablation of sarcolipin (SLN), a regulatory protein and uncoupler of sarco(endo)plasmic reticulum Ca2+-ATPases, leads to excessive diet-induced obesity and glucose intolerance in mice.
We have previously shown that mice lacking the sarco(endo)plasmic reticulum Ca(2+)-ATPase pump regulatory protein sarcolipin (Sln(-/-)), an uncoupler of Ca(2+) uptake, develop excessive diet-induced obesity under standard housing conditions.
However, Sln(-/-) mice developed excessive obesity (P &lt; 0.05) and glucose intolerance (P &lt; 0.05) with high-fat feeding relative to wild-type controls.
Overall, our results suggest that SR membrane DHA content and unsaturation, and, in part, sarcolipin expression may contribute to SR Ca(2+) permeability and, in turn, may have implications in muscle-based metabolism and diet-induced obesity.
In situ hybridization for two selected transcripts (CA7, CXCL1) was performed on NAT (n = 3), adenoma (n = 3) and CRC (n = 3) FFPE samples.
In situ hybridization could confirm the upregulation of CXCL1 and downregulation of CA7 in colorectal adenomas and tumors compared to healthy controls.
A set of 26 transcripts [including matrix metalloproteinase-3 (MMP3) and chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 1 (CXCL1)] has been determined recently, indicating a linear expression correlation with the adenoma-dysplasia-carcinoma sequence, thereby having the potential to discriminate between dysplasia and early malignancy.
Currently, we find that high-grade dysplastic sessile adenomatous-stage and early-stage colorectal cancer conditions can be differentiated correctly by the stromal expression of MMP3 and CXCL1, respectively, on tissue microarray-based analysis.
A set of 11 transcripts (including CXCL1, CHI3L1 and GREM1) was determined which could correctly discriminate between high-grade dysplastic adenoma and CRC samples by 100% sensitivity and 88.9% specificity.
We assessed gene expression profiles of a list of 10 candidate genes (MMP-1, MMP-3, MMP-7, DEFA 1, DEFA-5, DEFA-6, IL-8, CXCL-1, SPP-1, CTHRC-1) by quantitative real time PCR in triplets of colonic mucosa (normal, adenoma, tumoral tissue) collected from the same patient during surgery for a group of 20 patients.
Several inflammatory cytokine genes (CXCL1, CXCL2, CXCL3, CCL20, IL8, CCL23, CCL19, CCL21, CCL5) are dysregulated in adenomas.
Expression of GROalpha mRNA was higher in primary adenocarcinomas (n = 132), adenomas (n = 32), and metastases (n = 52) than in normal colon epithelium (P &lt; 0.001).
Finally, Kibra complexes with Wts and kibra depletion in tissue culture cells induces a marked reduction in Yki phosphorylation without affecting the Yki/Wts interaction.
A targeted analysis of the PCCA and PCCB genes using available WES data from 157 further DCM patients subsequently identified another patient with propionic acidemia.
A regulatory region within the PCCB gene, a gene previously associated with schizophrenia, exhibited a suggestive association.
We report three patients with elevations of propionylcarnitine (C3), one without elevations of 2-methylcitrate and 3-hydroxypropionate in urine organic acid analysis, and the other two showing only mild elevations, all of whom were subsequently confirmed to have propionic acidemia by molecular analysis of PCCA and PCCB genes.
Five of the eight patients were diagnosed with Autism Spectrum Disorder, four of them had pathogenic variants in PCCB.
Propionic acidemia (PA) is an inborn error of metabolism, caused by mutations in either the PCCA or PCCB gene, leading to mitochondrial accumulation of propionyl-CoA and its by-products.
Propionic acidemia (PA) is a disorder of intermediary metabolism with defects in the alpha or beta subunits of propionyl CoA carboxylase (PCCA and PCCB respectively) enzyme.
This study aimed to investigate the association of two single nucleotide polymorphism (SNPs), one in the HLA-DPB1 (rs9277535) and one in the HLA-DQB2 (rs7453920), with chronic hepatitis B infection in a southern Brazilian sample.
Genotyping and expression analysis in HLA class II gene revealed that two SNPs of HLA-DPB1 (rs2071025 and rs3116996) were significantly correlated to RNA expression and progression of HCV-related liver diseases.
To investigate the influence of HLA-DP variants on the outcome of HBV infection in an Indonesian population where it has the third-highest prevalence of HBV infection worldwide, we performed a case-control study of 686 participants, including patients with HBV-related advanced or nonadvanced liver disease, patients with spontaneously resolved HBV, and healthy controls.
We also found that the SNPs in the 3'-UTR region of HLA-DPB1 were significant between the subgroups of inactive HBV carrier, chronic hepatitis B, or hepatic cirrhosis from the case group and the spontaneous HBV-clearance subgroup from the control group.
To investigate the genetic association between cirrhosis and polymorphisms in the genes encoding major histocompatibility complex, class II (HLA)-DR beta 1 (DRB1) and HLA-DP beta 1 (DPB1).
A population of 168 parent/offspring trios, in which the proband had a diagnosis of hepatitis B virus infection with clinical signs of cirrhosis.The HLA-DRB1 and DPB 1 gene polymorphisms of rs24755213 and rs202176660 were detected by PCR and single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) genotyping.Correlation analysis and haplotype relative risk analysis were carried out.
A/G genotypes were detected in rs24755213 of HLA-DRB1 and C/T genotypes were detected in rs202176660 of DPB1.The rs24755213 allele was associated with cirrhosis (P=0.014), with the G allele identified as a protective factor (Z=-2.33) and the A allele identified as a hazard factor (Z=2.33).The rs202176660 allele was also associated with cirrhosis (P =0.026), with the T allele identified as a protective factor (Z=-2.06) and the C allele identified as a hazard factor (Z=2.06).The haplotypes of G/T and A/C in rs24755213 and rs202176660 respectively were associated with cirrhosis (P =0.037 and 0.002, Z=-2.12 and 2.09 respectively).
In this group of Chinese patients with hepatitis B virus-related cirrhosis, polymorphisms in the HLA-DRB 1 and DPB1 genes were associated with cimhosis.
Previous studies have shown that genetic variants in HLA-DP genes affect disease progression in hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection.
We aimed to evaluate possible association between HLA-DPB1 rs9277534 polymorphism and different clinical complications of hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection.
Gamma-glutamylcysteine synthetase deficiency is also associated with hemolytic anemia, and some patients with this disorder show defects of neuromuscular function and generalized aminoaciduria.
miR-193b-3p was found to be downregulated and contributed to ovarian cancer (OC) progression.
We reported that oncogene SNHG7 predicted a poor clinical outcome and functioned as competitive endogenous RNA (ceRNA) antagonized microRNA-193b (miR-193b) to up-regulate the FAIM2 level in NSCLC.
Bioinformatic analysis predicted that SNHG7 harboured miR-193b-binding sites, and we found decreased miR-193b levels in NSCLC tissues when compared to relative normal tissues.
The restoration of miR-193b levels in NSCLC cell lines A549 and H125 suppressed the expression of FAIM2 and related tumour proliferation, metastasis and induced apoptosis.
The results indicated that miR-193b is indispensible for the ceRNA role of SNHG7 in FAIM2-supported tumourigenesis of lung cancer.
In this study, we evaluated the functions of miRNA (miR-193b) in liposarcoma in vitro and in vivo Deep RNA sequencing on 93 WDLS, 145 DDLS, and 12 normal fat samples demonstrated that miR-193b was significantly underexpressed in DDLS compared with normal fat.
Reintroduction of miR-193b induced apoptosis in liposarcoma cells and promoted adipogenesis in human adipose-derived stem cells (ASC).
miR-193b also stimulated reactive oxygen species signaling by targeting the antioxidant methionine sulfoxide reductase A to modulate liposarcoma cell survival and ASC differentiation state.
Expression of miR-193b in liposarcoma cells was downregulated by promoter methylation, resulting at least in part from increased expression of the DNA methyltransferase DNMT1 in WDLS/DDLS.
In vivo, miR-193b mimetics and FAK inhibitor (PF-562271) each inhibited liposarcoma xenograft growth.
In summary, miR-193b not only functions as a tumor suppressor in liposarcoma but also promotes adipogenesis in ASC.
The miRNA signature consists of the 18 miRNAs which strongly correlates with lung adenocarcinoma: hsa-let-7f-1, hsa-miR-16-1, hsa-miR-152, hsa-miR-217, hsa-miR-18a, hsa-miR-193b, hsa-miR-3136, hsa-let-7g, hsa-miR-155, hsa-miR-3199-1, hsa-miR-219-2, hsa-miR-1254, hsa-miR-1291, hsa-miR-192, hsa-miR-3653, hsa-miR-3934, hsa-miR-342, and hsa-miR-141.
Together, our studies show that the EWS/Fli1-repressed miR-193b is growth suppressive in Ewing Sarcoma, and identify ErbB4 as a target gene and candidate mediator of this growth suppression.
Most notably, we demonstrate that the C77G polymorphism, which correlates with autoimmune disease susceptibility in humans, disrupts exon silencing by preventing the redundant activity of hnRNPs K and E2 to compensate for the weakened function of hnRNP L. Therefore, these studies provide an important example of the functional relevance of combinatorial function in splicing regulation and suggest that additional polymorphisms may similarly disrupt function of the ESS1 silencer.
Closely related sets of lacZ mRNAs, carrying 5'-leaders from the PYK1, PGK1, RpL3, Rp29, HSP12, HSP26 or THI4 mRNAs, were studied.
RNA blot hybridization analysis showed that the steady-state level of the SUP45+ transcript is less than 10% of that for ribosomal protein L3 or rp59 transcripts.
We assessed the therapeutic efficacy of NMN and the role of SIRT3 in the Friedreich's ataxia cardiomyopathy mouse model (FXN-KO).
Taken together, these results serve as important preclinical data for NMN supplementation or SIRT3 activator therapy in Friedreich's ataxia patients.
This case suggests that 3D-FLAIR-VISTA images are useful for the visualisation of acute vestibular neuritis.
To evaluate the neurovascular compression (NVC) in patients with trigeminal neuralgia (TN) using T2 VISTA and FLAIR VISTA fusion imaging.
BTB/POZ domain-containing protein 7 (Btbd7) has been found in various cancers, including lung cancer and liver cancer, but the role of Btbd7 in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), CSC self-renewal, and chemoresistance is still unknown.
In conclusion, our results suggest that Btbd7 is a promising agent for the inhibition of survival and chemoresistance of cancer stem-like cells of NSCLC, which may act as an important therapeutic target in NSCLC.
In present study, we examined BTBD7 expression status and its association with unfavorable clinical features in non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
Firstly, we studied the fresh specimens, and found that both mRNA and protein expression levels of BTBD7 in NSCLC tissue were significantly increased compared with the adjacent nontumorous lung tissue.
Then, we determined BTBD7 protein expressions in the paraffin-embedded samples from NSCLC patients, and analyzed the relations of BTBD7 expression with clinicopathologic features of the patients.
The results showed that incidence of metastasis in patients with positive BTBD7 expression was significantly higher than that in those with negative BTBD7 expression, and the positive BTBD7 expression rate in metastatic cases was significantly higher than that in non-metastatic ones; furthermore, Cox regression analyses revealed that BTBD7 was an independent risk factor for either metastasis or survival in NSCLC patients.
Thus, we conclude that BTBD7 contributes to metastasis of NSCLC and BTBD7-positive NSCLC may have a high potential for metastasis and thereby a poor prognosis.
Mutations in Nesprin-1 and 2 (also called Syne-1 and 2) are associated with numerous diseases including autism, cerebellar ataxia, cancer, and Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy.
We present a bioinformatical approach to accurate definition of the boundaries of each SR by comparison with canonical SR structures, allowing for a large-scale homology modelling of the 74 nesprin-1 and 56 nesprin-2 SRs.
This review briefly describes the discovery of each of the HRASLS enzymes and their role in cancer, and discusses the biochemical function of each enzyme, as well as the biological role, if known.
Furthermore, when H-rev107 was expressed in human NT2/D1 testicular cancer cells, cell migration and invasion were inhibited.
Our data suggest that the PGD2-cAMP-SOX9 signal pathway might play an important role in H-rev107-mediated cancer cell invasion in testes.
In the present study, we used methylation-specific PCR (MSP) to analyze promoter methylation of 9 gastric cancer-associated genes, including MLF1, MGMT, p16, RASSF2, hMLH1, HAND1, HRASLS, TM, and FLNc, and their association with clinicopathological characteristics and clinical outcome in a large cohort of gastric cancers.
Tarzarotene-induced gene 3 (TIG3) and HRAS-like suppressor (HRASLS3) are members of the HREV107 family of class II tumor suppressors, which are down-regulated in various cancer cells.
Our previous research suggested that the P2X4 receptor (P2X4R) expression in microglia was involved in the activation of toll-like receptor-4 (TLR4) in the dorsal horn in the rat model of cancer induced bone pain (CIBP).
Using an FDA-approved anti-parasitic agent Ivermectin as a prototype agent to allosterically modulate P2X4 receptors, we can switch the balance between the dual pro-survival and cytotoxic functions of purinergic signaling in breast cancer cells.
Potentiated P2X4/P2X7 signaling can be further linked to the ATP rich tumor microenvironment providing a mechanistic explanation for the tumor selectivity of purinergic receptors modulation and its potential to be used as a platform for integrated cancer immunotherapy.
We investigated the association of high myopia with the common single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of five candidate genes - early growth response 1 (EGR1), v-fos FBJ murine osteosarcoma viral oncogene homolog (FOS), jun oncogene (JUN), vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP), and vasoactive intestinal peptide receptor 2 (VIPR2).
In the discovery phase, EGR1, JUN and VIP did not show any significant association while FOS and VIPR2 demonstrated significant haplotype association with high myopia.
This is the first study to suggest a role of VIPR2 in the genetic susceptibility to high myopia.
The VIPR2 and SNTB1 genes are expressed in the retina and the retinal pigment epithelium and have been previously reported to have potential functions for the pathogenesis of myopia.
Our results suggest that variants of the VIPR2 and SNTB1 genes increase susceptibility to high myopia in Han Chinese.
To investigate the dynamic expression and significance of vasoactive intestinal peptide receptor 2 (VIPR2) on retina-choroid-clera in high myopia.
VIPR2 may play an important role on the formation and development of myopia.
The presence of a dysregulated NF-KB/Snail/YY1/RKIP loop was recently established in metastatic prostate cancer cells and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma; however, its involvement in multiple myeloma (MM) has yet to be investigated.
Compound 6a showed the highest inhibitory activity with IC50 - 0.99 myM to human liver carcinoma HepG2 cells and low cytotoxicity towards Lep3 (IC50 = 191 myM).
The results obtained revealed that: (1) UDCA and its metal complexes in the tested concentrations decreased (to a varying degree) the viability and proliferation of the treated cells in a time- and concentration-dependent manner; (2) chicken hepatoma (LSCC-SF-Mc29) cells were most sensitive to the cytotoxic and antiproliferative action of the compounds tested, followed by rat sarcoma (LSR-SF-SR) cells; (3) Cu-UDCA and Ni-UDCA were more effective against animal LSCC-SF-Mc29 and LSR-SF-SR cells, while Zn-UDCA significantly decreased the viability and proliferation of human tumour cell lines; (4) applied independently, UDCA expressed lower cytotoxic/cytostatic activity as compared to metal complexes; and (5) the sensitivity of the non-tumour embryonic Lep-3 cells to the effects of UDCA and its metal complexes was comparable or even higher than those of the human tumour cells.
Compounds 5, 7-8 and 10-18 were evaluated for their cytotoxical effect on four cancer cell lines: human colorectal cancer cell line HT-29, breast cancer cells MDA-MB-231, cervical cancer cells HeLa, human liver carcinoma HepG2 and human normal diploid cell line Lep3.
The positive emotions program for schizophrenia (PEPS) is a new method that specifically aims to reduce the syndrome of a diminished capacity to experience.
PEPS is a specific, short, easy to use, group-based intervention to improve pleasure, and motivation in schizophrenia.
They took part in eight sessions of the Positive Emotions Program for Schizophrenia (PEPS)--an intervention that teaches participants skills to help overcome defeatist thinking and to increase the anticipation and maintenance of positive emotions.
Although renal involvement is uncommon in primary Sjoegren's syndrome (pSS), patients may experience renal tubular acidosis type I (RTA I), tubulointerstitial nephritis, diabetes insipidus (DI), nephrolithiasis, and Fanconi syndrome.
CONCLUSIONS This was a pSS patient with tubulointerstitial nephritis, diabetes insipidus, renal tubular acidosis, hypokalemia, and nephrolithiasis, who was receiving symptomatic treatment for diabetes insipidus.
pSS should be considered as one of the differential diagnoses in patients with diabetes insipidus and renal tubular acidosis.
However, we cannot exclude the possibility that a higher PWV in pSS patients is caused, not by pSS itself, but by the use of steroids, hypertension and dyslipidemia.
This study examined how patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and their physiotherapists (PHTs) value an eHealth self-management intervention following a period of use.
These disorders include adenomatous polyposis syndromes (APC and MUTYH), juvenile polyposis coli (BMPR1A and SMAD4), Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome (STK11/LKB1), and PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome (PHTS; PTEN), which can present with a more limited juvenile polyposis phenotype.
PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome (PHTS), DICER1 syndrome, and hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cell cancer (HLRCC) syndrome are pleiotropic tumor predisposition syndromes that include benign and malignant neoplasms affecting adults and children.
The resulting differential diagnosis includes (attenuated) familial adenomatous polyposis ([a]FAP), MUTYH-associated polyposis (MAP), polymerase proofreading-associated polyposis (PPAP), phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) hamartoma tumor syndrome (PHTS), Peutz-Jeghers syndrome and juvenile polyposis, each with a specific genetic background.
Immune dysregulation in patients with PHTS included lymphopenia, CD4+ T-cell reduction, and changes in T- and B-cell subsets.
Combined homozygous deficiency for Rbbp1/Arid4a and heterozygous deficiency for Rbbp1l1/Arid4b altered epigenetic modifications at the PWS-IC with reduced trimethylation of histone H4K20 and H3K9 and reduced DNA methylation, changing the maternal allele toward a more paternal epigenotype.
These data identify Rbbp1/Arid4a and Rbbp1l1/Arid4b as new members of epigenetic complexes regulating genomic imprinting at the PWS/AS domain.
We report here for the first time that chorea-acanthocytosis red cells are characterized by impaired autophagy, with cytoplasmic accumulation of active Lyn and of autophagy-related proteins Ulk1 and Atg7.
In chorea-acanthocytosis erythrocytes, active Lyn is sequestered by HSP90-70 to form high-molecular-weight complexes that stabilize and protect Lyn from its proteasomal degradation, contributing to toxic Lyn accumulation.
An interplay between accumulation of active Lyn and autophagy was found in chorea-acanthocytosis based on Lyn coimmunoprecipitation with Ulk1 and Atg7 and on the presence of Ulk1 in Lyn-containing high-molecular-weight complexes.
In chorea-acanthocytosis, we found (1) dyserythropoiesis; (2) increased active Lyn; (3) accumulation of a marker of autophagic flux and autolysososme degradation; (4) accumlation of Lamp1, a lysosmal membrane protein, and LAMP1-positive aggregates; and (5) reduced clearance of lysosomes and mitochondria.
Our results uncover in chorea-acanthocytosis erythroid cells an association between accumulation of active Lyn and impaired autophagy, suggesting a link between chorein and autophagic vesicle trafficking in erythroid maturation.
Adult Lyn(up/up) mice were anemic, with dysmorphic red cells (spherocyte-like, acanthocytes) in their circulation, indicative of hemolytic anemia and resembling the human disorder chorea acanthocytosis.
The IHC results demonstrated significant increases of protein expressions of FGF19, FGFR4 and EpCAM in specimens with fatty liver, NASH, cirrhosis, and HCC compared to healthy liver tissue.
FGF19, FGFR4 and EpCAM expressions between the different histologic stages of fatty liver steatohepatitis-cirrhosis-HCC carcinogenesis sequence were compared to healthy hepatic tissue.
Overexpression of FGF19/FGFR4 significantly correlated with EpCAM as a marker of hepatic cancer stem cells within the fatty liver-steatosis-cirrhosis-HCC sequence.
Our findings suggest that genetic polymorphism in FGFR4 rs351855 may be associated with the risk of HCC coupled with liver cirrhosis and may markedly increase the AFP level in Taiwanese patients with HCC.
This study examined the BCAR1-CFDP1-TMEM170A locus on chromosome 16, associated with carotid IMT and coronary artery disease in the IMT and IMT-Progression as Predictors of Vascular Events (IMPROVE) cohort, to identify the functional variant.
This study identified rs4888378 in the BCAR1-CFDP1-TMEM170A locus as a novel genetic determinant of cIMT and coronary artery disease risk in individuals of European descent.
We previously demonstrated that treatment of diabetic peripheral neuropathy with the short (4 hours) half-life phosphodiesterase 5 (PDE5) inhibitor, sildenafil, improved functional outcome in diabetic db/db mice.
To further examine the effect of PDE5 inhibition on diabetic peripheral neuropathy, we investigated the effect of another potent PDE5 inhibitor, tadalafil, on diabetic peripheral neuropathy.
Use of phosphodiesterase-5 (PDE-5) inhibitors has been reported to be a risk factor for development of nonarteritic anterior ischemic optic neuropathy (NAION) in males, based largely on a number of case reports.
To present a summary of 10 cases of non-arteritic anterior ischemic optic neuropathy (NAION) in patients who received phosphodiesterase type 5 (PDE-5) inhibitors.
We looked at alpha-blockers and intraoperative floppy iris syndrome (IFIS), phosphodiesterase type 5 (PDE5) inhibitors and non-arteritic ischemic optic neuropathy (NAION) and lastly anticholinergic medications and glaucoma.
There is no convincing evidence that PDE5 inhibitors cause non-arteritic anterior ischemic optic neuropathy (NAION), but patients should be advised of the possible risk of visual loss, especially in patients with risk factors of ischemic heart disease.
In prostate adenocarcinoma, besides mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes that are known to increase the incidence of high-risk cancer in young patients, new studies have shown mutation in other gene such as HOXB13 and also polymorphisms in MYC, MSMB, KLK2 and KLK3 that can be related to hereditary prostate cancer.
Immortalized human prostate basal epithelial EP156T cells and progeny cells that underwent epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT), primary prostate epithelial cells (PrECs) and prostate cancer cell lines LNCaP, VCaP and 22Rv1 were used to examine context dependent restriction and activation of the AR and classical target genes, such as KLK3.
Across 66 meta-analyses, a total of 20 genetic variants involving 584,100 subjects in 19 different genes (KLK3, IGFBP3, ESR1, SOD2, CAT, CYP1B1, VDR, RFX6, HNF1B, SRD5A2, FGFR4, LEP, HOXB13, FAS, FOXP4, SLC22A3, LMTK2, EHBP1 and MSMB) exhibited significant association with prostate cancer.
We hypothesized that EPOR signaling is important in pathological angiogenesis and tested this hypothesis using a rat model of oxygen-induced retinopathy that is representative of human retinopathy of prematurity.
Lentiviral-delivered shRNAs that knocked down Muller cell-expressed VEGF in the retinopathy of prematurity model also reduced phosphorylated EPOR (p-EPOR) and VEGFR2 (p-VEGFR2) in retinal ECs.
To evaluate the effects of intravitreal injection of soluble erythropoietin (EPO) receptor (sEPOR) on photoreceptor cell apoptosis in an animal model of retinal detachment (RD).
The aim of this study was to investigate the effects of supplemental erythropoietin (EPO) on its receptor (EPOR) and signal transduction pathways in rat model of retinal detachment (RD).
To investigate the possible involvement of erythr opoietin (EPO)/erythropoietin receptor (EPOR) system in neovascularization and vascular regeneration in diabetic retinopathy (DR).
Signaling pathways that are responsible for these Muller cell-mediated EPO/EpoR functions may be therapeutic targets for diabetic retinopathy.
The week of delivery was statistically significantly shorter in the study group and the levels of biochemical markers of inflammation (C-reactive protein and fibrinogen in the serum) were statistically significantly higher in women with bacterial vaginosis comparing to the control group.
Biomeasure collection included height, weight, hip and waist circumference, blood pressure, heart rate, and preventricular contraction, timed walk and chair stands, smell, saliva collection using a Salivette (cortisol), saliva passive drool in a tube (dehydroepiandrosterone, estradiol, progesterone, testosterone), dried blood spots (Epstein-Barr virus antibody titers, C-reactive protein, glycosylated hemoglobin, hemoglobin, cholesterol, high-density lipoprotein), whole blood in a microtainer (cytokines), urine (creatinine, vasopressin, oxytocin), Oragene (genotype), respondent-administered vaginal swabs (bacterial vaginosis,yeast, and vaginal cell cytology), and Actiwatch (sleep patterns and activity).
Twenty variables were evaluated by univariate and logistic regression analysis: age, history of pregnancy/delivery, gynecological open/laparoscopic surgery, PID, oral contraceptives/intrauterine device use and intrauterine operation before onset, body temperature, signs of peritoneal irritation, vomiting/diarrhea, abnormal vaginal discharge, endometriosis/fibroid/adenomyosis/any cystic lesion detected by ultrasonography, white blood cell counts/C-reactive protein (CRP) levels .
The study aim was to evaluate inflammation markers values (C-reactive protein (CRP), Erythrocite sedimentation (ES), White blood cells count (WBC)) in surgically treated pediatric patients with diagnosed developmental displasia of the hip or Perthes disease before and after operation.
We investigated the levels of D-dimer and C-reactive protein (CRP) in a cohort of HIV-infected adults with and without osteonecrosis of the femoral head.
D-dimer and CRP levels were measured prior to and at the time of diagnosis for osteonecrosis patients, at the time of negative MRI of the hips for controls, and at least 6 months later for both groups.
Postdiagnosis, D-dimer and CRP levels were also elevated in the osteonecrosis patients compared with controls.
Linear regression demonstrated a rise in D-dimer levels from prediagnosis to diagnosis in the osteonecrosis patients whereas CRP levels did not change significantly over time.
Compared to controls, patients who developed osteonecrosis had elevated levels of D-dimer and CRP at diagnosis.
Dental caries' GWAS identified significant signals in LYZL2, AJAp1, and KPNA4; and efforts are ongoing to identify genetic factors for multiple caries phenotypes.
In erosive gastritis, increased proliferation (MET) and transport (UCP2, SCFD1, KPNA4) were found, while genes associated with adhesion (SIGLEC11), transcription regulation (ESRRG), and electron and ion transport (ACADM, CLIC6) were down-regulated.
Mice bearing the MS-2 fibrosarcoma were administered 0.25, 0.5 or 1 mg kg(-1) body weight (b.w.)
MIP-1alpha, ADAM8, ADAM12 and CD68 were detected by immunohistochemistry in 24 paraffin-embedded specimens of central giant cell lesions of jaw and giant cell tumors respectively.
Cells of the MS-2 fibrosarcoma were injected in mice in two compartments in order to cause the development of tumors in different host tissues.
MS-2 fibrosarcoma implanted in BALB-CDF1 mice was investigated by frequency and time domain measurements of the autofluorescence (AF) radiation emitted upon excitation by a N(2) laser beam (337.1 nm).
Zn(II)-phthalocyanines (ZnPc) and its octapentyl (ZnOPPc) and octadecyl (ZnODPc) derivatives have been intravenously injected at a dose of 1.46 mumol/kg into female Balb/c mice bearing an intramuscularly transplanted MS-2 fibrosarcoma.
to Balb/c mice bearing an intramuscularly implanted MS-2 fibrosarcoma.
The pharmacokinetic behavior and photodynamic properties of the dimer D1 were examined in Balb/c mice bearing an MS-2 fibrosarcoma.
Extensive experimental tests have been performed on mice bearing the MS-2 fibrosarcoma or the L1210 leukemia.
Zn(II)-octapentyl-phthalocyanine (ZnOPPc), incorporated into a Cremophor oil emulsion, was found to be a highly selective tumour-targeting agent (50-fold larger concentration in the tumour than in the peritumoral tissue) when injected at a dose of 1.46 mumol (kg body weight)-1 in Balb/c mice bearing an intramuscularly transplanted MS-2 fibrosarcoma.
Additionally, we discovered that the sensitivity of Ewing sarcoma cells to inhibition or suppression of RNR is mediated, in part, by high levels of SLFN11, a protein that sensitizes cells to DNA damage.
Ewing sarcoma, which is characterized by the chimeric transcription factor EWS-FLI1, has notably high SLFN11 expression, leading us to investigate whether EWS-FLI1 drives SLFN11 expression and the role of SLFN11 in the drug response of Ewing sarcoma cells.
EWS-FLI1 binds near the transcription start site of SLFN11 promoter and acts as a positive regulator of SLFN11 expression in Ewing sarcoma cells.
EWS-FLI1-mediated SLFN11 expression is responsible for high sensitivity of Ewing sarcoma to camptothecin and combinations of PARP inhibitors with temozolomide.
Importantly, Ewing sarcoma patients with higher SLFN11 expression showed better tumor-free survival rate.
Overall, the strongest CDI-associated risk factors, which have significant contributions to the CDI burden as well, were the experience of gastroenteritis (OR=5.08, PAR%=17.09%) and use of antibiotics (OR=1.69, PAR%=19.00%), followed by the experiences of female pelvic infection, irritable bowel syndrome, inflammatory bowel disease, and pneumonia, and use of proton-pump inhibitors (OR=1.52-2.37, PAR%=1.95-2.90).
We included patients over age 64 admitted to a tertiary care hospital between 2009-2010 with heart failure, pneumonia, or acute coronary syndrome who were taking a medication in any of six commonly-interchanged classes on admission: proton pump inhibitors (PPIs), histamine H2-receptor antagonists (H2 blockers), hydroxymethylglutaryl CoA reductase inhibitors (statins), angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs), and inhaled corticosteroids (ICS).
CBG deficiency caused a fall of hepatic 11Beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2 expression and an increase in epidymal adipose tissue, particularly in HL mice.
This study was designed to evaluate the effects calcium fructoborate (CFB) and sodium tetraborate (NTB) as supplements in Iraqi patients with active rheumatoid arthritis (RA) maintained on etanercept.
Increased expression of endogenous Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) ligands (e.g., Tenascin-C, S100A8/A9, citrullinated fibrinogen (cFb) immune complexes) has been observed in patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
The aim of the study was to investigate the allotypic variability of complement factor B (BF) in patients and relatives with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and its association with serological biomarkers and clinical features of the disease.
Restoration of the expression of miR-499 in the mdx mouse model of Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) reduced the severity of DMD Thus, we have identified a miR-499/Fnip1/AMPK circuit that can serve as a mechanism to couple muscle fiber type and mitochondrial function.
The direct quantitative relation between microvascular leakage and kidney (dys)function may provide a missing link between near-normal tissue morphology and septic shock-related renal failure, thus further highlighting the important role of vascular integrity in septic shock-related renal failure.
Endothelial dysfunction is involved in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis and cardiovascular complications in chronic kidney disease (CKD).
Our results supports the presence of endothelial dysfunction in CKD patients.
Correlation between elevated serum AMDA concentration and disadvantageous changes in left ventricular structure and function may indicate an important role of endothelial dysfunction in cardiovascular complications in CKD patients.
This is why it is opportune to review the response of the renal MC to sepsis and discuss the determinants of its (dys)function and how it contributes to the pathogenesis of renal failure.
The aim of this work was to assess the effect of statin therapy on inflammatory and fibrinolytic/endothelial (dys)function markers in end-stage renal disease (ESRD) patients under hemodialysis (HD), according to the type of vascular access.
This study was carried out to immuno-localize and estimate the levels of cyclooxygenase 1 and 2 in human gingival tissue samples from healthy individuals, chronic periodontitis patients and patients with cyclosporine induced gingival overgrowth.
The study results demonstrated a significantly higher mean levels of COX-1 and 2 in drug induced gingival overgrowth samples (p&lt;0.05).
COX-1 and COX-2 was localized to epithelium and connective tissue in human gingival tissue sections from cyclosporine induced gingival overgrowth.
This study investigated the role of inhibitors of cyclo-oxygenases (COX-1 and COX-2) in a model of periodontal disease in rats.
Our results provide evidence for participation of COX-1 and COX-2 in early stages of periodontal disease in rats.
Following experimental gingivitis, cyclooxygenase-1 and microsomal prostaglandin E synthase-1 expression did not change.
miR-27a, miR-181a, and miR-570 genetic variants have been found to play an important role in many cancers, but their contribution in gallbladder carcinoma (GBC) has not been explored.
We performed chip-based matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionisation time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF) mass spectrometry using the MassARRAY system and multiplexed genotyping assays to investigate the association between 10 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the ADAM33 gene (F_+1, Q_-1, S_1, ST_+4, ST_+7, V_-2, V_-1, V_2, V_4, V_5) and asthma and asthma severity in a large Australian Caucasian population of nonasthmatic controls (n = 473), and patients with mild (n = 292), moderate (n = 238) and severe (n = 82) asthma.
However, the role of TRIM11 in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is unknown.
Foxp3 expression was lower in lesional vitiligo skin specimens compared to controls; it was also lower in lesional vitiligo specimens than nonlesional vitiligo specimens.
In addition, there was no significant correlation between Foxp3 expression with TGF-Beta and IL-10 expressions in lesional skin specimens in the vitiligo group.
In order to sustain the role of Tregs in pathogenesis and disease activity of vitiligo, surface markers for CD4(+)CD25(+) and FoxP3(+) peripheral Tregs were evaluated by flow cytometry in 80 Egyptian patients with nonsegmental vitiligo in addition to 60 healthy control subjects and correlated with clinical findings.
Vitiligo patients had significantly decreased numbers of both peripheral CD4(+)CD25(+) and FoxP3(+) T cells compared to control subjects (11.49%  +/- 8.58% of CD4(+) T cells versus 21.20%  +/- 3.08%, and 1.09%  +/- 0.96% versus 1.44%  +/- 0.24%, resp., P &lt; 0.05 for both).
(3) We replicated a previous association of FOXP3, a transcription factor that regulates T-cell development and function, with vitiligo; and (4) we discovered that C1GALT1C1 exhibits sex-specific effect on disease risk in both IBDs.
Its influence on the expression of IL-17, IL- 22 and FoxP3 as markers for the Th17 and Tregs lineages has not been studied before in the context of non-segmental vitiligo (NSV).
Clinical evaluation Vitiligo Area Scoring Index (VASI) and determination of tissue expression of IL-17, IL-22 and FoxP3 by qRT-PCR (lesional, perilesional) were carried out before and after therapy.
The aim of this study is to assess tissue FoxP3+ natural regulatory T-cells (Tregs), as well as CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells in active vs. stable nonsegmental vitiligo.
Immunohistochemical double-staining for expression of CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells with immunostaining for expression of FoxP3 in lesional, marginal, and nonlesional skin of nonsegmental vitiligo was used to evaluate the abundance of Tregs among CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells in active and stable cases of vitiligo.
A significant increase in the number of CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells and a highly significant reduction in the number of FoxP3-expressing Tregs were detected in marginal skin in both stable and active vitiligo cases.
FoxP3+ cells were decreased in tissue of patients with vitiligo compared with healthy controls.
To evaluate the effect of NB-UVB on circulating CD4(+) CD25(high) FoxP3(+) regulatory T cells (FoxP3(+) Tregs) in vitiligo.
The CD4(+) CD25(high) Tregs% and FoxP3(+) Tregs% were significantly higher in vitiligo patients compared with controls.
Each of circulating CD4(+) CD25(high) Tregs% and FoxP3(+) Tregs% didn't correlate with either extent or activity of vitiligo before or after NB-UVB.
Phospholipase A2-associated neurodegeneration (PLAN), a syndrome of Neurodegeneration with Brain Iron Accumulation (NBIA), is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by mutations in PLA2G6 gene.
The aim of this study was to investigate the association of a migraine without aura and Ala379Val polymorphism of lipoprotein-associated phospholipase A2 (Lp-PLA2) gene in the Iranian population.
We investigated the significance of lymphatic count, vascular count and angiogenic growth factors using immunohistochemistry in 108 tumour specimens of epithelial ovarian cancer with antibodies to lymphatic vessel endothelial hyaluronan receptor (LYVE-1), platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule CD31, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and thymidine phosphorylase (TP) in epithelial ovarian cancer to understand the pathogenesis of metastasis in ovarian cancer.
Immunohistochemical staining of patient samples revealed that a significant perivascular infiltration of M1, but not M2, macrophages coincides with endothelial expression of the critical EndMT transcription factors Snail/Slug in involuting hemangiomas.
Thirty-seven ameloblastoma cases were evaluated for the involvement of EMT by immunohistochemical staining and western blotting using antibodies against Slug, Snail, Twist, TGF-Beta, and E-cadherin.
Slug and TGF-Beta were expressed in the nuclei of peripheral and stellate reticulum cells of ameloblastoma nests.
Thus, strong expression of Slug and TGF-Beta and reduced expression of E-cadherin might be related to the local invasiveness of ameloblastoma.
Immunohistochemical method was used to examine the expression of EMT-related proteins: Slug, E-cadherin and fibronectin, in 41 cases of sinonasal inverted papilloma (SIP), 33 cases of sinonasal squamous cell carcinoma (SNC), and 22 cases of normal mucosa as a control.
In this study, we accessed the expression and correlation of p-STAT3 with Survivin, Cyclin D1, CD147, Slug and Ki67 by immunohistochemical staining of human tissue microarray which contains 72 adenoid cystic carcinoma (AdCC), 12 pleomorphic adenoma (PMA) and 18 normal salivary gland (NSG) using digital pathological scanner and scoring system.
In the present study, we investigated the expression of a panel of EMT markers, namely E-cadherin, N-cadherin, SLUG, SNA1 and TWIST in a cohort of human pituitary adenomas.
The present study examined the effects of a GABA(C) receptor antagonist on the light-evoked responses of retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) in a rat model of retinitis pigmentosa.
In conclusion, GABA(C) receptors may be novel targets for therapeutic interventions aimed at increasing light responsiveness in patients with retinitis pigmentosa or other diseases involving degeneration of photoreceptors.
This interval encompasses several retinal dystrophy loci, including the ELOVL4 gene, mutated in autosomal dominant Stargardt disease, and the RIM1 gene, mutated in autosomal dominant cone-rod dystrophy, as well as the retinally expressed GABRR1 and -2 genes.
We proposed to assess serum antioxidant vitamins and magnesium (Mg) levels in patients with fibromyalgia (FM) in comparison to healthy controls.
There were no significant differences in the levels of vitamins A, C, and E and Mg between control subjects and patients with fibromyalgia (p &gt; 0.05).
Finally we show that high expression of LTBP3 and SNED1 correlates with poor outcome for ER(-)/PR(-)breast cancer patients.
sst3 receptors were present in 38% of DA, 40% of AA, and 84% of GBM.
Deletion of a phenylalanine at position 1617 (delF1617) in the extracellular linker between segments S3 and S4 in domain IV of the human heart Na(+) channel (hH1a) has been tentatively associated with long QT syndrome type 3 (LQT3).
More dramatically, when the LQT3 mutation M1766L was introduced into the different clones, Na current was markedly reduced in the hH1 and hH1a backgrounds, whereas in hH1b the Na current was not reduced.
Several studies have begun to elucidate the roles of TRPV1, TRPV6, TRPM8, and TRPC1 in cancer progression; however, no study has examined the expression profiles of human TRP channels in breast cancer on a large scale.
(4) The Trpv6 gene expression is significantly upregulated in several human malignancies including the most common cancers, prostate and breast cancer (Wissenbach et al.
We show that the plasma membrane calcium channel TRPV6, which is highly selective for Ca(2+), is overexpressed in some breast cancer cell lines.
Silencing of TRPV6 expression in a breast cancer cell line with increased endogenous TRPV6 expression leads to a reduction in basal calcium influx and cellular proliferation associated with a reduction in DNA synthesis.
TRPV6 gene amplification was identified as one mechanism of TRPV6 overexpression in a subset of breast cancer cell lines and breast tumor samples.
Analysis of two independent microarray expression datasets from breast tumor samples showed that increased TRPV6 expression is a feature of estrogen receptor (ER)-negative breast tumors encompassing the basal-like molecular subtype, as well as HER2-positive tumors.
Breast cancer patients with high TRPV6 levels had decreased survival compared with patients with low or intermediate TRPV6 expression.
Our findings suggest that inhibitors of TRPV6 may offer a novel therapeutic strategy for the treatment of ER-negative breast cancers.
Most interestingly, TRPC1, TRPM7 and TRPM8 expression strongly correlated with proliferative parameters (SBR grade, Ki67 proliferation index, and tumor size), and TRPV6 was mainly overexpressed in the invasive breast cancer cells.
The epithelial calcium channel TRPV6 is upregulated in breast carcinoma compared with normal mammary gland tissue.
In this study, we examined the effect of tamoxifen on TRPV6 function and intracellular calcium homeostasis in MCF-7 breast cancer cells transiently transfected with EYFP-C1-TRPV6.
These findings illustrate how tamoxifen might be effective in estrogen receptor-negative breast carcinomas and suggest that the therapeutic effect of tamoxifen and protein kinase C inhibitors used in breast cancer therapy might involve TRPV6-mediated calcium entry.
This study highlights a possible role of TRPV6 as therapeutic target in breast cancer therapy.
TRPV6 is an endothelial calcium entry channel that is strongly expressed in breast adenocarcinoma tissue.
In this study, we further confirmed this observation by analysis of breast cancer tissues, which indicated that TRPV6 mRNA expression was up-regulated between 2-fold and 15-fold compared with the average in normal breast tissue.
Therefore, we investigated how TRPV6 affects the viability, apoptosis, and calcium transport in the breast cancer cell line T47D.
The in vitro model showed that TRPV6 can be regulated by estrogen, progesterone, tamoxifen, and 1,25-vitamin D and has a large influence on breast cancer cell proliferation.
TRPV6 may be a novel target for the development of calcium channel inhibitors to treat breast adenocarcinoma expressing TRPV6.
Cervical cancer model showed cytokeratin 19 expression in different epithelial layers and weak or no expression for cytokeratin 5 and cytokeratin 10.
While Keratin, type II cytoskeletal 5, Peroxiredoxin-1 and 14-3-3 protein sigma showed a decrease in their protein expression level in cervical cancer in comparison with normal cervix cells.
To assess the role of Beta(7) integrins in chronic ileitis, we generated SAMP1/YitFc lacking Beta(7) integrins (SAMP1/YitFc Itgb7(-/-)) using a congenic strain developed via marker-assisted selection.
In both young (&lt;20 wk) and old (20-50 wk) SAMP1/YitFc Itgb7(-/-) mice, ileitis was reduced by 30-50% compared with SAMP1/YitFc mice.
Cotransfer of SAMP1/YitFc MLN B cells but not SAMP1/YitFc Itgb7(-/-) MLN B cells along with CD4(+) T cells resulted in exacerbated ileitis severity in SCID mice.
The prominent decreases in HDAC expression during status epilepticus are consistent with the previously demonstrated increased expression of numerous proteins and with the augmented acetylation of histone H4.
To understand the molecular actions of status epilepticus at the chromatin level, we studied the effects of kainate-induced status epilepticus on two different histone modifications at amino terminal tails: histone H3 phosphorylation at serine 10 and histone H4 acetylation.
Background L-acetylcarnitine, a drug marketed for the treatment of chronic pain, causes analgesia by epigenetically up-regulating type-2 metabotropic glutamate (mGlu2) receptors in the spinal cord.
The serotonin 2A (5-HT2A) and metabotropic glutamate 2 (mGlu2) receptors regulate each other and are associated with schizophrenia.
Brain metabotropic glutamate receptor 2 (mGluR2) has been proposed as a therapeutic target for the treatment of schizophrenia-like symptoms arising from increased glutamate transmission in the forebrain.
Reduced SHOX gene expression has been demonstrated to be associated with all skeletal abnormalities in Turner syndrome, other than scoliosis (and kyphosis).
This pilot gene expression study used relative quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) of the SHOX (short stature on X) gene to determine whether it is expressed in vertebral body growth plates in idiopathic and congenital scoliosis.
SHOX abundance was demonstrated in congenital and idiopathic scoliosis vertebral body growth plates.
SHOX expression was 11-fold greater in idiopathic compared to congenital (n = 3) scoliosis (p = 0.027).
This study confirmed that SHOX was expressed in vertebral body growth plates, which implies that its expression may also be associated with the scoliosis (and kyphosis) of Turner syndrome.
In this study, increased SHOX expression was demonstrated in idiopathic scoliosis (tall stature) and congenital scoliosis.
The GFM model segregates patients into 3 groups based on: age &gt;65 years, WBC &gt;15 x 10(9) /L, anemia, platelets &lt;100 x 10(9) /L, and ASXL1 mutation status, with respective median survivals of 56 (low), 27.4 (intermediate), and 9.2 (high) months.
The Groupe Francophone des (GFM) score segregated CMML patients into three risk groups based on: age &gt;65 years, WBC &gt;15 x 109/L, anemia, platelets &lt;100 x 109/L, and ASXL1 mutation status.
Egf1.5 also bound PAP1, PAP3 and serine proteinase homolog 2 (SPH2).
Consistent with its PAP inhibitory activity, Egf1.0 also prevented processing of pro-phenoloxidase, serine proteinase homolog (SPH) 1, and SPH2.
Egf1.0 also potentially interacts with SPH2 and two other proteins, ferritin and gloverin, not previously associated with the phenoloxidase cascade.
B cells express CD1d, however, we show that CD1d expression is reduced on B cells from patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL).
Elevated CD1d expression is detected in CD5(+) IL10-producing B cells, called B10 B cells, and is correlated with poorer prognosis in chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), a CD5(+) B cell malignancy with B10-like functional properties.
A significant decrease was observed in the levels of CD1d on monocytes in the PB of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) patients compared with the healthy controls.
We analyzed the expression of CD1d, an antigen-presenting molecule, on peripheral blood leukemic cells of cases of chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) by flow cytometry.
The numbers of circulating invariant natural killer T cells and the expression of CD1d on antigen-presenting cells were evaluated in patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia and age-matched controls.
In conclusion, the invariant natural killer T-cell and CD1d axis is fundamentally intact in patients with early-stage chronic lymphocytic leukemia and, despite reduced circulating numbers, function is retained in fludarabine-treated patients.
To study the change of endogenous hydrogen sulfide (hydrogen sulfide, H2S) and its rate-limiting enzyme Cystathionine-gamma-lyase (CSE) in allergic rhinitis through guinea pigs with intervention treatment.
So far, potential immune-modulatory properties of PACAP have not been investigated in experimental ileitis.
Mice were perorally infected with Toxoplasma (T.) gondii to induce acute ileitis (day 0) and treated daily with synthetic PACAP38 from day 1 to 6 post infection (p.i.
Study 1 - Nerves in colonic resection specimens with either acute diverticulitis (AD, n = 16) or chronic diverticulitis (CD, n = 16) were assessed for neuropeptide expression recording % area staining with protein gene product (PGP9.5), substance P (SP), neuropeptide K (NPK), pituitary adenylate cyclase activating polypeptide (PACAP), vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP) and galanin.
Our aim was to obtain insight in the role of PACAP in experimental colitis in mice and thus its possible role in inflammatory bowel disease.
PACAP-deficient (PACAP-/-) mice and wild-type control mice were challenged by colitis-inducing agent, dextran sulfate sodium (DSS).
Our findings indicate that PACAP regulates the production of pro-inflammatory cytokine in the experimental colitis.
Therefore, VIP/PACAP and analogues have been recently proposed as very promising candidates, alternative to other existing treatments, for treating acute and chronic inflammatory and autoimmune diseases, such as septic shock, rheumatoid arthritis, multiple sclerosis, Parkinson's disease, Crohn disease, or autoimmune diabetes.
Therefore, PACAP and analogs have been proposed as very promising candidates, alternative to other existing treatments, for treating acute and chronic inflammatory and autoimmune diseases, such as septic shock, arthritis, multiple sclerosis, Crohn's disease, or autoimmune diabetes.
The distribution of PACAP in ganglionic and aganglionic portions of the large intestine of patients with Hirschsprung's disease was examined by immunohistochemistry and radioimmunoassay.
The scarcer PACAP innervation of the aganglionic segment may contribute to the defect in intestinal relaxation seen in patients with Hirschsprung's disease.
We have determined the solution structures of the three quasi-RNA-recognition motifs (qRRMs) of hnRNP F in complex with G-tract RNA.
We also show that isolated qRRMs of hnRNP F are sufficient to regulate the alternative splicing of the Bcl-x pre-mRNA, suggesting that hnRNP F would act by remodeling RNA secondary and tertiary structures.
In order to gain insight into G-tract recognition by hnRNP H members, we initiated an NMR study of human hnRNP F. We present the solution structure of the three quasi RNA recognition motifs (qRRMs) of hnRNP F and identify the residues that are important for the interaction with the Bcl-x RNA by NMR chemical shift perturbation and mutagenesis experiments.
The three qRRMs exhibit the canonical betaalphabetabetaalphabeta RRM fold but additional secondary structure elements are present in the two N-terminal qRRMs of hnRNP F. We show that qRRM1 and qRRM2 but not qRRM3 are responsible for G-tract recognition and that the residues of qRRM1 and qRRM2 involved in G-tract interaction are not on the beta-sheet surface as observed for the classical RRM but are part of a short beta-hairpin and two adjacent loops.
Bipolar cell-related dystrophies were associated with the highest risk of SE high myopia 239.7; odds ratio (OR) mild hyperopia 263.2, both P &lt; .0001; SE -6.86 diopters (D) (standard deviation [SD] 6.38), followed by cone-dominated dystrophies (OR high myopia 19.5, P &lt; .0001; OR high hyperopia 10.7, P = .033; SE -3.10 D [SD 4.49]); rod dominated dystrophies (OR high myopia 10.1, P &lt; .0001; OR high hyperopia 9.7, P = .001; SE -2.27 D [SD 4.65]), and retinal pigment epithelium (RPE)-related dystrophies (OR low myopia 2.7; P = .001; OR high hyperopia 5.8; P = .025; SE -0.10 D [SD 3.09]).
Two hundred fifty-eight eyes that had LASIK for low myopia were reviewed, and a subsequent control-matched comparative analysis of visual outcomes in highly myopic eyes (SE -7.54 +/- 1.43 D) versus low myopic eyes (SE -2.26 +/- 0.51 D) was performed after controlling for preoperative and surgical parameters.
Submucous cleft palate (SMCP) classically involves bifid uvula, zona pellucida, and notched hard palate.
Validate an assessment protocol for diagnosis of occult submucous cleft palate (OSMCP) and identify physical examination features present in patients with OSMCP in the relaxed and activated palate positions.
This study aimed to evaluate the craniofacial morphology of unoperated adult submucous cleft palate (SMCP) patients and to explore the possible correlation between the intrinsic growth insufficiency of the maxillofacial complex and the severity of the cleft.
A total of 20 unoperated SMCP patients, 20 unoperated overt cleft palate (OCP) patients, and 32 normal controls, ages between 18 and 30, were included for cephalometric analysis.
Because some patients with submucous cleft palate (SMCP) are asymptomatic, surgical treatment is conventionally delayed until hypernasal resonance is identified during speech production.
Since 69% of individuals with 22q11.2 deletion have a palatal abnormality, we studied the prevalence of 22q11.2 deletion syndrome in 378 Iranian patients during a 5-year period, including 291 patients affected with cleft palate only without cleft lip (CPO) and 87 patients affected with velopharyngeal incompetence (VPI) and/or submucous cleft palate (SMCP).
Submucous cleft palate (SMCP) is a relatively rare variant of the common pathology of cleft palate with specific anatomic and clinical features.
In this study, 366 patients with VPD were retrospectively stratified into cleft lip and palate (CLP), cleft palate (CP), submucous cleft palate (SMCP), occult submucous cleft palate (OSMCP), and non-CP groups.
The postoperative speech outcomes of submucous cleft palate (SMCP) surgery are known to be poorer than those of other types of cleft palate.
We attempted to objectively characterize the postoperative complications and speech outcomes of the surgical treatment of SMCP through a comparison with the outcomes of incomplete cleft palate (ICP).
The aim of this study was to visualize bony defects of the palate and vomer in submucous cleft palate patients (SMCP) by three-dimensional (3D) computed tomography (CT) reconstruction and to classify the range of bony defects.
Objective : Submucous cleft palate (SMCP) is a congenital condition associated with abnormal development of the soft palate musculature.
To investigate the relationship between miR-501-5p expression and the clinicopathological factors in patients with lung adenocarcinoma in Xuanwei area.
Surgical specimens of lung adenocarcinoma and paired adjacent tissues from 24 patients with lung adenocarcinoma from Xuanwei area were examined for miR-501-5p expression using microRNA microarray technique and qPCR.
MicroRNA microarray analysis and qPCR validation results revealed significantly upregulated expressions of miR-501-5p in patients with lung adenocarcinoma from Xuanwei area (Plt;0.01).
The microarray data showed an up-regulation of miR-501-5p by 3.17 folds in lung adenocarcinoma tissue compared with the adjacent tissue (P=0.22376, FDR=0.071395).
miR-501-5p expression is up-regulated in lung adenocarcinoma with significant associations with the patients' age, TNM stages and serum CEA level in patients from Xuanwei area, suggesting its potential role in the tumorigenesis and progression of lung adenocarcinoma in Xuanwei area.
This study is aimed to study the role of miR-501-5p in the progression of gastric cancer.
Real-time PCR analysis was used to determine miR-501-5p expression in gastric cancer cell lines, clinical tissues and 112 clinicopathologically characterized gastric cancer specimens.
The role of miR-501-5p in maintaining gastric cancer stem cell like phenotype was examined by tumor-sphere formation assay and expression of stem cell markers.
Herein, our results revealed that miR-501-5p was markedly upregulated in gastric cancer cell lines and clinical tissues.
High miR-501-5p levels predicted poor overall survival in gastric cancer patients.
Gain-of-function and loss-of-function studies showed that ectopic expression of miR-501-5p enhanced the cancer stem cell-like phenotype in gastric cancer cells.
Notably,wnt/Beta-catenin signaling was hyperactivated in gastric cancer cells that overexpress miR-501-5p, and mediated miR-501-5p-induced cancer stem cell-like phenotype.
These results demonstrate that miR-501-5p maintains constitutively activated wnt/Beta-catenin signaling by directly targeting DKK1, NKD1 and GSK3Beta, which promotes gastric cancer stem cell like phenotype.
Taken together, our findings reveal a new regulatory mechanism of miR-501-5p and suggest that miR-501-5p might be a potential target in gastric cancer therapy.
Backgroud/Aims: Previous studies have shown that miR-501 is involved in the development of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) by promoting cell proliferation through CYLD.
Previous studies have shown that the micro-ribonucleic acid miR-501-5p is upregulated in hepatocellular carcinoma cells and tissues with high hepatitis B virus replication, and that miR-501 overexpression significantly promotes hepatitis B virus replication.
We further analysed a published microarray-based high-throughput dataset (NCBI/GEO/GSE36915) and found that miR-501-5p was upregulated in hepatocellular carcinoma tumour tissues.
We therefore investigated the possible function of miR-501-5p during the development of hepatocellular carcinoma.
Expression of miR-501-5p in human hepatocellular carcinoma specimens and cell lines was assessed, using real-time polymerase chain reaction.
MiR-501-5p was upregulated in hepatocellular carcinoma specimens and cell lines, and directly targeted the 3' untranslated region of CYLD.
MiR-501-5p upregulation corresponded with a downregulation of CYLD in the same tissues and cell lines, and overexpression of MiR-501-5p decreased CYLD expression, increased expression of cyclin D1 and c-myc and promoted the proliferation of hepatocellular carcinoma cells in vitro.
This study suggests that miR-501-5p may play an important role in the development of hepatocellular carcinoma by promoting cell proliferation, and indicates that miR-501-5p may represent a novel therapeutic target for hepatocellular carcinoma.
Here we show that patients with clear cell kidney carcinoma that express low levels of miR501-5p exhibited a good prognosis compared with patients with unchanged or high levels of this microRNA.
Consistently, in kidney carcinoma cells the downregulation of miR501-5p induced an increased caspase-3 activity, p53 expression as well as decreased mTOR activation, leading to stimulation of the apoptotic pathway.
Our results support a role for miR501-5p in balancing apoptosis and cell survival in clear cell renal carcinoma.
Thus, the expression of miR501-5p is a possible biomarker for the prognosis of clear cell renal carcinoma.
miR-501 expression was significantly up-regulated in hepatocellular carcinoma tissues, where HBV replication kept high.
To assess development of reaching and head stability in infants at very high risk (VHR-infants) of cerebral palsy (CP) who did and did not develop CP.
Infants with cerebral palsy (CP) show a worse reaching quality than VHR-infants without CP.
Following our clinical observation of tonic responses in response to the knee jerk in infants at very high risk for cerebral palsy (VHR infants), we systematically studied tonic responses, clonus, and reflex irradiation.
The described disorders include (1) hypomagnesemia with secondary hypocalcemia, an earlyonset, autosomal-recessive disease segregating with chromosome 9q12-22.2; (2) autosomal-dominant hypomagnesemia caused by isolated renal magnesium wasting, mapped to chromosome 11q23; (3) hypomagnesemia with hypercalciuria and nephrocalcinosis, a recessive condition caused by a mutation of the claudin 16 gene (3q27) coding for a tight junctional protein that regulates paracellular Mg(2+) transport in the loop of Henle; (4) autosomal-dominant hypoparathyroidism, a variably hypomagnesemic disorder caused by inactivating mutations of the extracellular Ca(2+)/Mg(2+)-sensing receptor, CASR: gene, at 3q13.3-21 (a significant association between common polymorphisms of the CASR: and extracellular Mg(2+) concentration has been demonstrated in a healthy adult population); and (5) Gitelman syndrome, a recessive form of hypomagnesemia caused by mutations in the distal tubular NaCl cotransporter gene, SLC12A3, at 16q13.
Here, we focus on functional differences and individual contribution of acyl coA synthetases (ACSL) isoforms to the previously described ACSL/stearoyl-CoA desaturase (ACSL1/ACSL4/SCD) metabolic network causing invasion and poor prognosis in colorectal cancer (CRC).
The purpose of the present study was to explore the relationship between ACSL4 expression level and clinical prognosis of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) patients.
High ACSL4 expression has been observed in aggressive breast cancer phenotype.
These results suggest that ACSL1, ACSL4 and ACSL5 expression is regulated by ER signaling pathways and ACSL5 is a potential novel biomarker for predicting prognosis of breast cancer patients.
Long chain acyl-CoA synthase-4 (ACSL4) expression has been associated with an aggressive phenotype in breast carcinoma cells, whereas its role in ERAlfa-positive breast cancer has not been studied.
Taken together, these results demonstrate that ACSL4 is a target of 17Beta-estradiol-stimulated ERAlfa and is required for the cellular uptake of exogenous PUFA and the manifestation of a more malignant phenotype in ERAlfa+ve breast carcinoma cells.
Here, we show that acyl-CoA synthetase long-chain family member 4 (ACSL4) is required for ferroptotic cancer cell death.
High expression of ACSL4 predicted a worse prognosis in colorectal cancer, but predicted better prognosis in breast, brain and lung cancer.
Mutations in SPG4/SPAST are the most frequent molecular aetiology in the autosomal dominant form of hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP).
Our study demonstrated further evidence of allelic heterogeneity in SPG4, dosage effects through NMD, and broad clinical features of the SPAST mutation.
Mutations of the SPAST (SPG4) gene coding for the spastin protein account for 40% of all autosomal dominant uncomplicated HSP.
Human skin fibroblasts were isolated from a 40-year-old hereditary spastic paraplegia patient carrying an intronic splice site mutation (c.1687+2T&gt;A) in SPAST, leading to hereditary spastic paraplegia type 4 (SPG4).
Hereditary spastic paraplegias (HSPs; SPG1-76 plus others) are length-dependent disorders affecting long corticospinal axons, and the most common autosomal dominant forms are caused by mutations in genes that encode the spastin (SPG4), atlastin-1 (SPG3A) and REEP1 (SPG31) proteins.
Our data confirm the genetic heterogeneity of childhood-onset pure HSP, with SPG4/SPAST and SPG3A/ATL1 being the most frequent forms.
Loss-of-function mutation of the SPAST gene, also known as SPG4, is the most common cause of HSP in patients.
Thus, Tau mediated mislocalization of TTLL6 and spastin activation reveals a pathological gain of function for Tau and spastin in this cellular model system of AD.In contrast, in hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) caused by mutations of the gene encoding spastin (spg4 alias SPAST), spastin function in terms of microtubule severing is decreased at least for the gene product of the mutated allele, resulting in overstable microtubules in disease model systems.
Three genetic types, SPG3 (ATL1), SPG4 (SPAST) and SPG31 (REEP1), appear predominantly and may account for up to 50% of autosomal dominant hereditary spastic paraplegias (AD-HSPs).
This phase was aimed at pre-qualifying the candidate BRP (cBRP) and at documenting the impact of differences in the antibody detection methodology enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) procedures on results of pertussis antisera calibration versus the currently used standard US standard pertussis antiserum (mouse) Lot 1 (SPAM-1) (United States Food and Drug Administration (USFDA) reference serum) and the cBRP.
Calibration of the proposed International Reference Reagent of Pertussis Antiserum (pIRR) in terms of US Lot 1 gives results which are broadly consistent between laboratories for antibodies to each antigen, although the between-laboratory differences are larger than those seen for comparison of identical sera.
It was therefore recommended, with the agreement of all participants, that the preparation in vials coded 97/642 be established as the First International Reference Reagent for Pertussis Antiserum, mouse, with assigned unitages 16 units of anti-PT per vial, 143 units of anti-FHA per vial and 30 units of anti-PRN per vial based on its calibration in terms of US Lot 1.
The right exotropia increased to 30 PD 2 months after surgery.
Finally, the levels of sCD40Lwere significantly increased in serum of children both with steroid-sensitive and steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome (NS), and in adult patients with biopsy-proven FSGS, compared to healthy subjects, but neither in children with congenital NS nor in patients with membranous nephropathy.
Of the 64 patients, 17 were mesangial proliferative glomerulonephritis (MsPGN), 15 were IgA nephropathy (IgAN), 12 were membranous glomerulonephritis (MGN), 11 were focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS), three were membranous proliferative glomerulonephritis (MPGN), three were immune complex glomerulonephritis (ICGN), two were minimal change disease (MCD), and one was IgM nephropathy (IgMN).
There was a wide variation in kidney pathology, some directly related to the WM: amyloidosis (n = 11, 25%), monoclonal-IgM deposition disease/cryoglobulinaemia (n = 10, 23%), lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma infiltration (n = 8, 18%), light-chain deposition disease (n = 4, 9%) and light-chain cast nephropathy (n = 4, 9%), and some probably related to the WM: thrombotic microangiopathy (TMA) (n = 3, 7%), minimal change disease (n = 2, 5%), membranous nephropathy (n = 1, 2%) and crystal-storing tubulopathy (n = 1, 2%).
Primary GN included mesangial proliferative GN (MePGN), IgM nephropathy, focal segmental glomerulosclerosis, minimal change disease, IgA nephropathy, membranoproliferative GN, membranous nephropathy, crescentic GN, and post-infectious GN.
Recombination with DXS84 and DXS164 places CLS distal to DMD in Xp21-pter.
Knocking down the expression of Beclin 1 efficiently suppressed autophagosome and autolysosome accumulation, and abolished the protective effects of spermidine against STS-induced neurotoxicity.
We further found the association between PYK2, S6K1, and AR in their protein expression and phosphorylation levels among normal prostate PZ-HPV-7 cells and prostate cancer LNCaP and 22Rv1 cells.
Since NDRG1 impacts oncogenic signaling pathways interfering with tumor progression, we suggest that the Pyk2-NDRG1 axis is possibly involved in conveying the anti-proliferative effect of Beta-ionone in prostate cancer cells.
With gemcitabine, folate-G5-PAMAM-D delivered PSMAe/p-TK-Cx43 (folate-G5-PAMAM-D/PSMAe/p-TK-Cx43) significantly decreased prostate cancer LNCaP cell proliferation and promoted apoptosis in vitro.
(1) Our objective was to demonstrate tumor growth inhibition by PF-562,271, a selective inhibitor of FAK and FAK2, or Pyk2,(2) in mouse xenograft models, both subcutaneous and metastatic, employing the human prostate cancer cell line PC3M-luc-C6, a modified PC3M cell line that expresses luciferase.
Pyk2 expression inversely correlates with malignancy of prostate cancer.
Therefore, our results indicate that RhoC promotes tumor metastasis in prostate cancer by sequential activation of Pyk2, FAK, MAPK, and Akt followed by the up-regulation of MMP2 and MMP9, which results in the stimulation of invasiveness of tumor cells.
Additionally, anti-CD132 mAb treatment of established chronic GVHD reversed liver and lung fibrosis, and pulmonary dysfunction characteristic of bronchiolitis obliterans.
In contrast, K. pneumoniae-infected Rag2(-/-)Il2rg(-/-) mice failed to produce IL-22.
Pleural effusion smears from 112 patients with either benign or malignant lung disease were investigated for the expression of EGFr and the oncogene proteins myc p64 and ras p21.
The aim of this study was to investigate the protective effects of FYGL on INS-1 rat insulinoma beta cells against IAPP-induced cell apoptosis, as well as the underlying mechanisms.
Further testing revealed islet-type amyloid polypeptide (or amylin), a protein found in various diseases such as diabetes, insulinoma and pancreatic adenocarcinoma-none of which was seen in our patient.
Using pancreatic rat insulinoma Beta-cells and human islets as model systems, we show that hA, following its internalization, first accumulates in the cytosol followed by its translocation into nucleus, and to a lesser extent lysosomes, keeping the net cytosolic amylin content low.
In addition to the in vitro assays, we have tested the effect of these compounds in an amyloid toxicity cell culture model and we have found that one of them, quercetin, has the ability to partly protect cultured pancreatic insulinoma cells from the cytotoxic effect of amylin.
Our data suggests that quercetin can contribute to reduce oxidative damage in pancreatic insulinoma Beta cells by modulating the aggregation propensity of amylin.
The other patient without thymoma initiated treatment with steroid, tacrolimus and IAPP and showed complete recovery one month later.
C-reactive protein (CRP), which is a marker of inflammation, has not been widely studied in inflammatory thyroid disorders particularly in sub-acute thyroiditis (SAT).
The objective of the study was to estimate and compare salivary CRP levels in Hashimoto's thyroiditis (HT) and Subacute thyroiditis (SAT).
Due to fever, a high sedimentation rate and a high C-reactive protein (CRP), as well as high levels of anti-thyroid peroxidase antibodies (anti-TPOab), differential diagnostic considerations included acute and subacute thyroiditis as well as Hashimoto's thyroiditis and thyroid malignancy.
Immunohistochemical staining of CD4, FOXP3, CD68, TGF-Beta1, IL-10, IL-4, IFN-Gamma, and MCP-1 showed that the occurrence of Tregs and TAMs increased in parallel with disease progression in OLK and OSCC.
The expression of CD68, CD14, CD163, CD200R, CD206, HLA-G, CD80, and CD86 was higher in CD14-positive cells co-cultured with the culture supernatants of CAFs established from OSCC specimens (CAF-educated cells) than in control cells.
Among cell surface and extracellular matrix biomarkers tissue biomarkers, matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-2, -9, CD31 and CD68 seem to be useful for differentiation of OVC and OSCC and glucose transporter-1 (GLUT-1) can help in differentiation of OVC from oral epithelial dysplasia.
Samples from 62 patients with T1/2N0M0 OSCC were immunohistochemically stained and scored for the cellular expression of mast/stem cell growth factor receptor (c-KIT) (MCs), CD68 (macrophages), Alfa-smooth muscle actin (Alfa-SMA) (CAFs) and CD31 (endothelial cells) and this was analyzed according to disease recurrence.
The expression of SIRPAlfa in OLK was higher than in OSCC, correlating with the expression of CD68 and CD163 on macrophages.
CD68 and lysozyme expression in cannibalistic tumor cells of oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) is well established.
Formalin-fixed tissues of 30 OSCC cases with cellular cannibalism (CC) (positive control), 30 OSCC cases without CC, and 17 normal oral epithelium specimens (negative control) were subjected to immunohistochemical analysis for CD68 and lysozyme expression.
OSCC with CC showed CD68 and lysozyme expression in 30 (100%) cases each {CD68: [weak: 21 (70%), strong: 9 (30%)]; lysozyme: [weak: 24 (80%), strong: 6 (20%)]}.
In OSCCs without CC, CD68-positive tumor cells were present in 13 (43.33%) cases [weak: 10 (33.33%); strong: 3 (10%)] and lysozyme expression was present in 13 (43.33%) cases [weak: 12 (40%); strong: 1 (3.33%)].
The CD68 and lysozyme expression in OSCCs without CC, OSCCs with CC, and control group showed statistically significant differences (P &lt; 0.001).
Significant correlation was also observed between CD68 and lysozyme expression and different grades of OSCC.
CD68 and lysozyme expression in non-cannibalistic tumor cells of OSCC can be related to CC.
Prenatal diagnosis of glycogenosis type II was performed by direct assay of acid alpha-glucosidase (EC 3.2.1.20) in chorionic villous biopsy obtained by transcervical cannula aspiration from a pregnancy at risk in the 10th week of gestation.
In this review, we describe the fusion genes recently reported in bone and soft-tissue tumors such as solitary fibrous tumor, aneurysmal bone cyst, nodular fasciitis, CIC-DUX4 fusion gene-positive small round cell tumors, or BCOR-CCNB3-positive sarcoma as well as other genetic aberrations in dedifferentiated liposarcoma, malignant rhabdoid tumor, cartilaginous tumor, Langerhans cell histiocytosis chondroblastoma, or giant cell tumor of the bone.
Besides, we screened for all the known genes related to axonal autosomal recessive Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT2A2/HMSN2A2/MFN2, CMT2B1/LMNA, CMT2B2/MED25, CMT2B5/NEFL, ARCMT2F/dHMN2B/HSPB1, CMT2K/GDAP1, CMT2P/LRSAM1, CMT2R/TRIM2, CMT2S/IGHMBP2, CMT2T/HSJ1, CMTRID/COX6A1, ARAN-NM/HINT and GAN/GAN), for the genes related to autosomal recessive hereditary spastic paraplegia with thin corpus callosum and axonal peripheral neuropathy (SPG7/PGN, SPG15/ZFYVE26, SPG21/ACP33, SPG35/FA2H, SPG46/GBA2, SPG55/C12orf65 and SPG56/CYP2U1), as well as for the causative gene of peripheral neuropathy with or without agenesis of the corpus callosum (SLC12A6).
To revisit the concepts of vacuole formation associated with mitochondrial dysfunction, we performed a comparative neuropathological analysis in Kearns-Sayre syndrome (KSS) and full-length peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-g coactivator-1a (FL-PGC-1a)-deficient mice, a recently proposed morphological model of mitochondrial encephalopathies.
Brain tissues from an individual with genetically proven KSS (22-year-old man) and aged FL-PGC-1a-deficient and wild-type (male, 70-75-week-old) mice were analysed using ultrastructural and immunohistochemical methods, with a specific focus on myelin-related, oligodendroglial, axonal and astrocytic pathologies.
Besides demonstrating remarkable similarities in the lesion profile of KSS and FL-PGC-1a-deficient mice, this study first provides morphological evidence for the identical origin of WM and GM vacuolation as well as for the presence of intracytoplasmic oligodendroglial vacuoles in mitochondriopathies.
In wild type, CLN1 and CLN2 mRNAs were rapidly downregulated, while in alg7 mutants, these transcripts were only transiently repressed before becoming greatly augmented.
Thus, deregulation of ALG7 interferes with cell cycle arrest by preventing a sustained downregulation of CLN1 and CLN2 mRNAs.
Although, compared to age-matched control samples, nonphosphorylated dolichols are significantly increased in the cerebral cortex of children with the late infantile and juvenile types of neuronal ceroid-lipofuscinosis (NCL), dolichyl phosphates are increased to a much greater extent in infantile, late infantile, and juvenile forms of this disease group.
In tumors of smooth muscle differentiation, only uterine leiomyoma and lipoleiomyoma are known to be associated with the altered HMGIC.
We investigated molecular and genetic alterations of the HMGIC in 36 benign and malignant smooth muscle tumors arising at various anatomical sites, including 13 uterine leiomyomas, two leiomyomas of the kidney with a t(12;14), one pelvic lipoleiomyoma, one vascular leiomyoma of the foot, two uterine leiomyosarcomas, six retroperitoneal leiomyosarcomas, one leiomyosarcoma of the urinary bladder, and 10 leiomyosarcomas of external soft tissues.
Thus, the HMGIC alterations in smooth muscle tumors are not confined only to uterine leiomyoma or lipoleiomyoma.
We evaluated the effect of diabetic retinopathy on 25 year survival rate among a population-based cohort of type 1 diabetic patients from Fyn County, Denmark.
CDDP + MMC, CDDP + TXL, MMC + TXL and CDDP were effective for endocervical adenocarcinoma.
We describe the identification of apo A-I amyloidosis by mass spectrometry in a 52-year old male, with no family history of amyloidosis, presenting with nephrotic syndrome and associated with heterozygosity for a novel APOA1 mutation (c.220 T &gt; A) which encodes the known amyloidogenic Trp50Arg variant.
In summary, our data demonstrate that the increase of apoA-IV caused by renal impairment is significantly modulated by low levels of serum albumin as a measure for the severity of the nephrotic syndrome.
We investigated in 207 patients with nondiabetic nephrotic syndrome and 274 controls whether the apolipoprotein(a) [apo(a)] kringle-IV repeat polymorphism explains the elevated Lp(a) levels in these patients.
Obestatin has a role in regulating food intake and energy expenditure, but the roles of obestatin and the GPR39 receptor in obesity and type 1 and type 2 diabetes mellitus (T1DM and T2DM, respectively) are not well understood.
These data suggest that development of agonists capable of specifically activating GPR39 may be a useful new therapeutic approach for diabetes management.
This compound was further optimized to improve ligand efficiency and pharmacokinetic properties to yield GPR39 agonists for the potential oral treatment of type 2 diabetes.
A well-established stimulatory role for GPR39 has been defined in insulin secretion which makes the receptor an attractive target for the treatment of type 1 or 2 diabetes.
Mice deficient in the zinc-sensor GPR39, which has been demonstrated to protect cells against endoplasmatic stress and cell death in vitro, display moderate glucose intolerance and impaired glucose-induced insulin secretion.
Here, we use the Tet-On system under the control of the proinsulin promoter to selectively overexpress GPR39 in the Beta cells in a double transgenic mouse strain and challenge them with multiple low doses of streptozotocin, which in the wild-type littermates leads to a gradual increase in nonfasting glucose levels and glucose intolerance observed during both food intake and OGTT.
Although the overexpression of the constitutively active GPR39 receptor in animals not treated with streptozotocin appeared by itself to impair the glucose tolerance slightly and to decrease the Beta-cell mass, it nevertheless totally protected against the gradual hyperglycemia in the steptozotocin-treated animals.
GPR39, a constitutively active 7TM receptor important for glucose-induced insulin secretion and maturation of pancreatic Beta-cell function, is up-regulated in adipose tissue on abstinence from food and chemically induced diabetes.
The current study investigates the trimodal combination of ABT-888, a potent inhibitor of PARP1-2, ionizing radiation and temozolomide(TMZ)-based chemotherapy in glioblastoma (GBM) cells.
This study investigated whether social defeat (SD) or exposure to an olfactory cue associated with the SD experience activated Fos and FosB/DeltaFosB (DeltaFosB) expression in brain regions implicated in the development of post-traumatic stress disorder.
On day 25, pulmonary eosinophilia, airway hyperresponsiveness, mucus hypersecretion, inflammatory cytokines such as IL-4, -5 and -13 in BAL fluid, gene expression of inflammatory mediators such as 5-LOX, E-selectin, VCAM-1, CCL5, TNF-Alfa, AMCase, Ym2, YKL-40, Muc5ac, CCL2 and iNOS in animal lung tissues, and serum IgE were determined.
We explored the relationship between 5-LO, central and peripheral eosinophilia, and effectiveness of DEC, using PAS or BALB/c mice and 5-LO-deficient mutants.
5-Lipoxygenase (5-LO)-deficient mice exposed to short-term intranasal Aspergillus protease allergen showed attenuated airway inflammation, decreased airway hyper-responsiveness and reduced bronchoalveolar eosinophilia when compared to wild-type mice.
We found that 5-LO knockout mice that were treated with a COX inhibitor during allergic sensitization and challenge had significantly increased airway hyperresponsiveness (AHR) (p &lt; 0.01) and airway eosinophilia (p &lt; 0.01) compared with 5-LO knockout mice that were treated with vehicle.
The effect of LTD(4) inhalation on antigen-induced AHR and airway eosinophilia was investigated in 5-LO gene-deficient mice.
We have reviewed current evidence in order to compare the utility of these functional diagnostic techniques with the fecal elastase-1 (FE-1) test in the following three scenarios: screening for PEI in patients presenting with symptoms suggestive of pancreatic disease, such as abdominal pain or diarrhea; determining the presence of PEI in patients with an established diagnosis of pancreatic disease, such as chronic pancreatitis or cystic fibrosis; determining exocrine status in disorders not commonly tested for PEI, but which have a known association with this disorder.
Although the importance of USP15 in pathologic processes remains ambiguous so far, in this review, we endeavor to summarize the literature regarding the relationship of the deubiquitinating action of USP15 with the proteins involved in the regulation of Parkinson's disease, virus infection, and cancer-related signaling networks.
We identified a mutation in the gene encoding the deubiquitination enzyme USP15 (Usp15L749R) that protected mice against both experimental cerebral malaria (ECM) induced by Plasmodium berghei and experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE).
We conducted an optimal-dose determination of combination chemotherapy consisting of paclitaxel (TXL), doxorubicin, and carboplatin (CBDCA) (TAC) in patients with endometrial cancer.
The recommended dose of TAC therapy for endometrial cancer was doxorubicin 45 mg/m(2) for day 1, TXL 150 mg/m(2) and CBDCA AUC 5 for day 2.
The effective regimens were CPT-11 + TXL, CDDP + CPT-11, CDDP + CPM, CDDP + TXL for the endometrial cancer.
SFRP2 promoter methylation was investigated in stool DNA isolated from 18 colorectal cancer (CRC) patients and 22 healthy controls using the MSRH assay based on methylation-specific DNA amplification followed by reverse hybridization of biotinylated amplicons to sequence-specific methylation detection probes, with MethyLight serving as a reference method.
We performed an epigenetic analysis of the first exon of the hVIM gene and the SFRP2 in circulating tumor cells (CTCs) and correlation with the corresponding primary colorectal cancer (CRC) tissue.
To evaluate the diagnostic value of secreted frizzled-related protein 2 (SFRP2) gene promoter hypermethylation in stool for colorectal cancer (CRC).
Finally, targeting DNMT3B by these miRs, decreased methylation of tumor suppressor genes such as SFRP1, SFRP2, WIF1 and DKK2 in the mentioned cell lines, and returned the expression of these tumor suppressor genes which can contribute to lethal effect on colon cancer cells and reducing tumorigenicity of these cells.
New research implicates Myo10 in a number of disease states including cancer metastasis and pathogen infection.
This review focuses on these developments with emphasis on the emerging roles of Myo10 in formation of cancer cell protrusions and metastasis.
A number of aggressive cancers show high levels of Myo10 expression and knockdown of Myo10 has been shown to dramatically limit cancer cell motility in 2D and 3D systems.
MYO10 was subsequently identified as a novel functional downstream target of miR-124, and was up-regulated in node-positive NSCLC tissues.
These results suggest that NF-KB-regulated miR-124 targets MYO10, inhibits cell invasion and metastasis, and is down-regulated in node-positive NSCLC.
Myosin X (MYO10) was recently reported to promote tumour invasion by transporting integrins to filopodial tips in breast cancer.
The expression of MYO10 and its associations with clinicopathological and biological factors were examined in breast cancer cells and breast cancer specimens (n=120).
Our findings suggest that elevated MYO10 expression increases the aggressiveness of breast cancer; this effect is dependent on the involvement of MYO10 in invadopodial formation.
Here, we demonstrate a role for the filopodia-inducing motor protein Myosin-X (Myo10) in mutant p53-driven cancer invasion.
Analysis of gene expression profiles from 2 breast cancer data sets revealed that MYO10 was highly expressed in aggressive cancer subtypes.
Myo10 was required for breast cancer cell invasion and dissemination in multiple cancer cell lines and murine models of cancer metastasis.
Introduction of mutant p53 promoted Myo10 expression in cancer cells and pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma in mice, whereas suppression of endogenous mutant p53 attenuated Myo10 levels and cell invasion.
These data indicate that Myo10 upregulation in mutant p53-driven cancers is necessary for invasion and that plasma-membrane protrusions, such as filopodia, may serve as specialized metastatic engines.
We also demonstrate that fMyo10-dependent orientation of radial migration is mediated at least in part by the netrin-1 receptor deleted in colorectal cancer.
Peripheral hyperinsulinemia modestly increases ISF and plasma ABeta in young and old mice, independent of neuronal insulin signaling.
We found that physiological hyperinsulinemia in awake, behaving mice does not increase CNS insulin to an appreciable level yet modestly increases extracellular ABeta.
In order to understand this relationship, we have studied an AD-prediabetes mouse model (APP/PS1) with severe hyperinsulinemia induced by long-term high fat diet (HFD), and an AD-T2D model, generated by crossing APP/PS1 and db/db mice (APP/PS1xdb/db).
We present a mouse model of AD (APPswe/PS1dE9 mouse) with severe hyperinsulinemia induced by long-term high fat diet (HFD) treatment.
Altogether our data suggest that early hyperinsulinemia is enough to exacerbate AD pathology observed in APP/PS1 mice, and supports the role of insulin-resistance therapies to stop or delay central complications associated.
To identify the risk factors of acute pancreatitis (AP) associated with different etiologies, in pregnancy (APP).
Forty-seven eligible patients were divided into two groups: biliary acute pancreatitis in pregnancy (BAPP, n = 31) and hypertriglyceridemic-induced pancreatitis in pregnancy (HAPP, n = 16).
Instead, they have been associated with several distinct clinical phenotypes, such as epidermolysis bullosa simplex with mottled pigmentation (mutation P25L in the V1 domain of keratin 5), epidermolysis bullosa simplex with migratory circinate erythema (frameshift mutation c1649delG in the V2 domain of keratin 5), striate palmoplantar keratoderma (PPK), and ichthyosis hystrix Curth-Macklin (different frameshift mutations in the V2 domain of keratin 1 (K1)).
Idiopathic CD4 lymphocytopenia (ICL) is a rare disorder of unknown etiology.
Systemic Mycobacterium avium intracellulaire (MAI) have been reported in non-HIV patients with Idiopathic CD4 lymphocytopenia.
We report two cases of immunocompetent patients with necrotizing viral retinitis found to have idiopathic CD4 lymphocytopenia.
Idiopathic CD4 lymphocytopenia should be considered healthy patients who develop ocular infections seen in the immunocompromised.
Here we demonstrate that IL-21-producing CD8 T cells are not associated with CD4 depletion and are absent in patients with idiopathic CD4 lymphocytopenia.
Clinicians should be aware of LOCID, which could be confused with HIV infection/AIDS or idiopathic CD4 lymphocytopenia.
Idiopathic CD4 lymphocytopenia is a very rare condition resulting in an immunodeficiency disorder that may or may not result in opportunistic infections.
To our knowledge, this is the first case of neuroinvasive West Nile virus occurring in the context of a diagnosis of idiopathic CD4 lymphocytopenia.
Idiopathic CD4 lymphocytopenia is an immunodeficiency disorder with low absolute CD4 T-lymphocyte count with no evidence of human immunodeficiency virus or other known cause.
After further evaluation, idiopathic CD4 lymphocytopenia was diagnosed.
Idiopathic CD4 lymphocytopenia is a rare acquired immunodeficiency.
Idiopathic CD4 lymphocytopenia (ICL) is a presumed heterogenous syndrome with key element low CD4 T-cell counts (below 300/mm^3) without evidence of HIV infection or other known immunodeficiency.
Three paediatric neurologists independently scored ICARS, SARA and BARS performances recorded on video, and also phenotyped the primary and secondary movement disorder features.
Prevalence and incidence rates of recurrent major adverse cardiovascular events (MACE) were calculated, according to the ACC/AHA VHR criteria (cardiovascular disease combined with diabetes, smoking, dyslipidaemia, and/or recent recurrent coronary events).
Independent risk factors included inpatient status at time of open-VHR, operation time, enterolysis, underweight, diabetes, preoperative anemia, length of stay, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, history of bleeding disorders, hernia with gangrene, and panniculectomy (all P &lt; 0.05).
These novel findings reveal that mutant p53-R248 maintains gain-of-function activity to stimulate cell invasion and induces the related gene expressions through an interaction with Rad21 in human ovarian cancer cells.
Here, our integrated The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) data set, tissue microarray-based analyses and multiple biologic evaluations together demonstrate a new small-molecule activator of ULK1 for better understanding of how ULK1, the mammalian homolog of yeast Atg1, as a potential drug target can regulate ACD by the ULK complex (ULK1-ATG13-RB1CC1/FIP200-ATG101), as well as other possible ULK1 interactors, including ATF3, RAD21 and CASP3/caspase3 in TNBC.
Here, we report that GABA(B1), via the coiled-coil domain, can also bind to soluble proteins of unknown function, that are affected in 22q11 deletion/DiGeorge syndrome and are therefore referred to as DiGeorge critical region 6 (DGCR6).
This region includes the genes DGCR6 (DiGeorge syndrome critical region protein 6) and PRODH (proline dehydrogenase 1), along with three open reading frames that may encode proteins of unknown function.
Embryos in which DGCR6 expression was attenuated revealed cardiovascular anomalies reminiscent of those found in DiGeorge syndrome.
Dgcr6 is the mouse homolog of human DGCR6, previously shown to be deleted in DiGeorge syndrome, a developmental field defect affecting the derivatives of the pharyngeal arches which is associated with 22q11.2 deletions.
We previously mapped Dgcr6 to mouse chromosome 16B1-B3, a region known to contain other mouse homologs of genes deleted in DiGeorge syndrome.
DGCR6 could be a candidate for involvement in the DiGeorge syndrome pathology by playing a role in neural crest cell migration into the third and fourth pharyngeal pouches, the structures from which derive the organs affected in DiGeorge syndrome.
A2 phosphofructokinase (PFKL), isocitrate dehydrogenase, pyruvate dehydrogenase, and ATP synthase subunit profiles were elevated in E/V vs. O/V; hypoglycemia augmented PFKL and Alfa-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase expression in E only.
The present study was undertaken to assess the effect of OS on three important enzymes of carbohydrate metabolism [glucokinase (GK) (EC 2.7.1.2), hexokinase (HK) (EC 2.7.1.1) and phosphofructokinase (PFK) (EC 2.7.1.11)] along with glycogen content of insulin-dependent (skeletal muscle and liver) and insulin-independent tissues (kidneys and brain) in STZ (65 mg/kg) induced model of diabetes for 30 days.
Three independently derived Tg-PFKL lines showed random and postprandial hyperglycemia with diminished acute insulin response following intravenous glucose tolerance load.
The effect of oral vanadate on intestinal sodium-dependent glucose transport and 6-phosphofructo-1-kinase (EC 2.7.1.11) activity was examined in male Sprague-Dawley rats following a 30-day period of non-treated streptozotocin-induced diabetes.
C-C chemokine receptor 7 (CCR7) has been proved to be closely associated with the metastasis of lung adenocarcinoma, and the mechanism is poorly understood.
In order to investigate the relationship between CCR7 and lymph node metastasis in lung adenocarcinoma, and to explore the role of CCR7 in treating lung adenocarcinoma, 40 clinical specimens were collected to define the relationship between CCR7 and lymph node metastasis in lung adenocarcinoma by immunohistochemistry.
Clinical case studies show that higher expression of CCR7 in lung adenocarcinoma tissues was associated with a higher lymph node metastasis.
All the results indicate that CCR7 can promote lymph node metastasis in lung adenocarcinoma by regulating VEGF-C/D-R3 pathway.
Thus CCR7 is proposed to be a potential prediction for poor prognosis of lung adenocarcinoma, and a therapeutic target for lymph node metastasis.
We examined the effects of CC chemokine receptor 7 (CCR7), CCR7 ligands and CrkL and c-ABL in lung adenocarcinoma.
We examined CCR7 and CCR7 ligands and CrkL and c-ABL mRNA expressions in surgically resected lung adenocarcinoma specimens and evaluated their contribution to prognosis, and the relationship with epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and TP53 mutations.
In lung adenocarcinoma, CrkL and c-ABL mRNAs were related to CCR7 mRNA expression (P&lt;0.0001).
We propose that CCR7 and CCL19 are clinically good prognostic factors and that CCR7 is strongly related to CrkL and c-ABL kinase mRNA expression in lung adenocarcinoma.
The aim of this investigate is to evaluate the effects of hypoxia on the expression of CCR7 and the invasiveness of lung adenocarcinoma A549 cells.
RT-PCR and Western blotting showed that the expression of CCR7 was detected in lung adenocarcinoma A549 cells, CCR7 mRNA and protein expression level were increased with culture time along either in normoxia or hypoxia condition; Furthermore, compared with normoxia group, the CCR7 mRNA and protein expression level in hypoxia group was increased (P &lt;0.01).
In this study, we examined the expression and function of these two chemokine receptors (CCR7 and CXCR3) in lung adenocarcinoma.
In clinical lung adenocarcinoma samples, we found the expression of CCR7 and CXCR3 in 65 and 90% cases, respectively, most of which had lymph node metastasis.
These results suggest that the activation of CCR7 and CXCR3 with their ligands preferentially stimulates lung adenocarcinoma metastasis to the draining lymph nodes.
describe context-dependent oncogenic and tumor-suppressive functions for the mammalian SWI/SNF (BAF) complex subunit ARID1A in the development and progression of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
The findings suggest novel molecular markers of BANF1, PLOD3 and SF3B4 indicating early-stage HCC in precancerous lesion, and also suggest drivers for understanding the development of hepatocarcinogenesis.
Perturbations to mammalian SWI/SNF (mSWI/SNF or BAF) complexes contribute to more than 20% of human cancers, with driving roles first identified in malignant rhabdoid tumor, an aggressive pediatric cancer characterized by biallelic inactivation of the core BAF complex subunit SMARCB1 (BAF47).
BAF recruitment to GGAA microsatellites activates the Ewing sarcoma transcriptional program.
We identified a new set of genes encoding subunits of the BAF chromatin remodeling complex that exhibited Ras-mediated dependence on PRC2 histone methyltransferase activity, a finding that is similar to what has been observed for other BAF subunits in cancer cells.
Among the affected BAF complex subunits, we determined Smarcd2 and Smarcc1 as putative driver candidates not yet fully identified by large-scale cancer genome sequencing projects.
We demonstrated de novo expression of VWF in glioma as well as osteosarcoma cells.
To investigate whether preoperative antigen plasma level of von Willebrand Factor (VWF:Ag) might be possible marker for GBM onset, progression, and prognosis, we retrospectively examined 57 patients with histological diagnosis for GBM and 23 meningiomas (MNGs), benign intracranial expansive lesions, enrolled as controls.
The median levels of vWF:Ag were significantly higher in GBMs than in meningiomas (MNGs) (183 vs. 133 IU/dL, P = 0.01).
The cumulative 1-year survival was significantly shorter in patients with VWF:Ag levels &gt;200 IU/dL than in those with levels &lt;200 IU/dL and increased VWF levels were associated with a threefold higher risk of death in GBM patients.
Our data suggest that VWF:Ag could be a circulating biomarker of disease malignancy, that could be considered, in association with other genetic and epigenetic factors, currently available in the GBM management.
A 3D cell culture induced microenvironment (containing only glial cells) is sufficient to promote expression of the endothelial markers CD105, CD31 and vWF in a proportion of glioma aggregates in vitro.
This observation was reproduced in vitro: when tumor stem cells derived from GBM were grown in the presence of human endothelial cells, a fraction of them acquired endothelial markers (CD31, CD105, VE-cadherin, and vWF).
The majority of melanomas emerge from clear skin without a precursor lesion, but it is unknown whether these melanomas can arise from melanocyte stem cells (MCSCs).
Here we employ mouse models to define the role of MCSCs as melanoma cells of origin, demonstrate that MCSC quiescence acts as a tumor suppressor, and identify the extrinsic environmental and molecular factors required for the critical early steps of melanoma initiation.
Specifically, melanomas originate from melanoma-competent MCSCs upon stimulation by UVB, which induces MCSC activation and translocation via an inflammation-dependent process.
These findings delineate melanoma formation from melanoma-competent MCSCs following extrinsic stimuli, and they suggest that abrogation of Hmga2 function in the microenvironment can suppress MCSC-originating cutaneous melanomas.
The main goal of this work was to verify whether transplantation of microencapsulated prepubertal porcine Sertoli cells (MC-SC) in the subcutaneous abdominal fat depot of spontaneously diabetic and obese db/db mice (homozygous for the diabetes spontaneous mutation [Leprdb ]) would: (i) improve glucose homeostasis and (ii) modulate local and systemic immune response and adipokines profiles.
In this study, to establish an in vitro SL model, human epidermal squamous carcinoma cell line HSC-1, which expresses higher levels of WNT1 than normal human epidermal keratinocytes, was co-cultured with early passage normal human epidermal melanocytes (NHEMs) as an in vitro McSC model.
Recently, we found that LNCaP androgen-responsive prostate cancer cells treated with MCS-C3 rapidly undergo intrinsic apoptosis through dramatic up-regulation of p21(CIP1).
Expression of miR-33a/b was markedly increased in human carotid atherosclerotic plaques compared with normal arteries, and there was a concomitant decrease in mitochondrial regulatory genes PGC-1Alfa, SLC25A25, NRF1, and TFAM, suggesting these genes are associated with advanced atherosclerosis in humans.
Considering its anti-proliferative action, principally given by inhibiting the MCs c-KitR anti-angiogenic pathway that leads cancer progression, and its role as chemosensitizer, masitinib is under clinical investigation in several human malignancies (Gastro-Intestinal Stromal Tumors, acute myeloid leukemia, systemic mastocytosis, pancreatic cancer, multiple myeloma, non-small cell lung cancer, melanoma, ovarian and prostate cancer), which are characterized by similar canine c-KIT proto-oncogene mutations.
We investigate the unknown tumor-killing activity of cytokine-induced killer (CIK) cells against autologous metastatic melanoma and the elusive subset of putative cancer stem cells (mCSC).
The metastatic melanoma cultures presented an average of 11.5% +/- 2.5% putative mCSCs, which was assessed by Oct4 promoter activity and stemness marker expression (Oct4, ABCG2, ALDH, MITF).
CIK tumor killing activity against mCSCs was intense (up to 71%, n = 4) and comparable with results reported against differentiated metastatic melanoma cells (P = 0.8).
For the first time, the intense killing activity of CIK cells against autologous metastatic melanoma, including mCSCs, has been shown.
These findings move clinical investigation of a new immunotherapy for metastatic melanoma, including mCSCs, closer.
In addition, FKBP51 induced some melanoma stem cell (MCSC) genes.
Results: Expressions of hsa-mir-1180, hsa-mir-149, hsa-mir-744 and hsa-mir-940 were all up regulated in high invasion capable cell lines (SNU423, SNU449) and vascular invasion patients with hepatocellular carcinoma (logFC&gt;1, P&lt;0.05).
Results from the Survival analysis showed that hsa-mir-1180 (HR=1.623, 95% CI: 1.114-2.365, P=0.012), hsa-mir-149 (HR=2.400, 95% CI: 1.639-3.514) and hsa-mir-940 (HR=1.704, 95%CI: 1.188-2.443, P=0.004) were independent risk factors on the prognosis of patients with hepatocellular carcinoma (P&lt;0.05).
Conclusion: With TCGA and GEO data mining, we found that hsa-mir-1180, hsa-mir-149, hsa-mir-744 and hsa-mir-940 were all highly related to the prognosis of hepatocellular carcinoma, that enabled it to be used to further study the biomarkers related to the prognosis of hepatocellular carcinoma.
Recently, several studies have investigated the association between polymorphisms in miR-146a rs2910164, miR-196a2 rs11614913, miR-499 rs3746444, miR-149 rs229283, miR-34b/c rs4938723, and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), which showed inconclusive results.
Numerous studies have explored the association between MIR-149 gene rs2292832 polymorphism and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) risk, but the results remains inconsistent.
When all the eligible studies were pooled into this meta-analysis, a significant association between MIR-149 gene rs2292832 polymorphism and hepatocellular carcinoma risk was found, while no association was found between this gene polymorphism and overall cancer risk.
We used"hepatocellular carcinoma/HCC","miRNA-149/miR-149/microRNA-149", and"miRNA-499/miR-499/microRNA-499"as key words to search papers in databases including China National Knowledge Internet (CNKI), Chinese BioMedical Literature (CBM), Vip Citation Databases (VIP), Wanfang, PubMed and Web of Science databases, and collected the case-control studies on the association of rs2292832 or rs3746444 and the susceptibility to hepatocellular carcinoma from updated to May 31st 2015.
Numerous studies have explored the association between miR-149 gene rs2292832 polymorphism and hepatocellular carcinoma risk, but the results remains inconsistent.
Odds ratios (OR) with 95% confidence intervals (CI), calculated by STATA software, were used to determine whether miR-149 gene rs2292832 polymorphism contributes to the risk of Hepatocellular carcinoma.
When all the eligible studies were pooled into this meta-analysis, a significant association between miR-149 gene rs2292832 polymorphism and hepatocellular carcinoma risk was found.
Our meta-analysis supports that the miR-149 gene rs2292832 polymorphism contributed to the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma from currently available evidence.
However, a study with a larger sample size is needed to further evaluate gene-environment interaction on MiR-149 gene rs2292832 polymorphism and hepatocellular carcinoma risk.
We conducted a case-control study to evaluate the association of miR-146a rs2910164 (C&gt;G), miR-149 rs2292832 (T&gt;C), miR-196a2 rs11614913 (T&gt;C) and miR-499 rs3746444 (T&gt;C) polymorphisms with the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma.
To examine the outcomes of allogeneic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) in first complete remission (CR1) compared with chemotherapy alone in a population-based setting, we identified a cohort of patients with acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) aged 15 to 70 years diagnosed between 2000 and 2014 in Denmark.
Using the Danish National Acute Leukemia Registry, we compared relapse risk, relapse-free survival (RFS), and overall survival (OS) between patients with unfavorable cytogenetic features receiving postremission therapy with conventional chemotherapy only versus those undergoing HSCT in CR1.
Our analyses indicated that VP16/CY/TBI significantly reduced relapse compared with CY/TBI (risk ratio, 0.75; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.56-1.00; P = .05) with a corresponding improvement in leukemia-free survival (hazard ratio [HR], 0.76; 95%CI, 0.62-0.93; P = .01), particularly in patients transplanted at CR1 with advanced-risk (positive minimal residual disease, presence of poor-risk cytogenetics, or an initial elevated leukocyte count) (HR, 0.75; 95%CI, 0.56-1.00; P = .05) or those transplanted beyond CR2 (HR, 0.58; 95%CI, 0.39-0.88; P = .01).
The aim of the present study was to observe the dynamic changes of the growth arrest and DNA damage-inducible 153 (GADD153) gene and caspase-12 in the brain tissue of rats with cerebral ischemia-reperfusion injury (CIRI) and the impact of curcumin pretreatment.
In Dahl salt-sensitive rats that were fed a high-salt diet, a model for hypertension-induced congestive heart failure, spermidine feeding reduced systemic blood pressure, increased titin phosphorylation and prevented cardiac hypertrophy and a decline in diastolic function, thus delaying the progression to heart failure.
Along the way we distinguish among titin alterations in systolic and in diastolic heart failure and ponder the evidence for titin stiffness as a potential target for pharmacological intervention in heart disease.
A mutation in the tenth Ig-like domain of titin's spring region is associated with arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy, a disease characterized by ventricular arrhythmias leading to cardiac arrest and sudden death.
The alterations in the relative expression of the two titin isoforms or alterations in their state of phosphorylation have been implicated in the pathophysiology of several diseases, such as diastolic heart failure, dilated cardiomyopathy, ischemic cardiomyopathy and aortic stenosis.
The aim of this study is to describe, in brief, the structure and location of titin, its association with different cardiomyopathies and understand how alterations in this macromolecule influence the pathophysiology of diastolic heart failure, emphasizing the therapeutic potential of the manipulation of this macromolecule.
Using whole blood mRNA samples from patients with prostate cancer, we have identified the four-gene panel of FAM129A, MME, KRT7 and SOD2 in circulating mRNA that are differentially expressed in a discovery cohort of metastatic samples.
The combination of expression patterns of AGR2 (anterior gradient 2) and CD10 by prostate cancer provided four phenotypes that correlated with clinical outcome.
Neutral endopeptidase loss is associated with prostate cancer growth, progression, and increased angiogenesis.
NEP expression was compared in prostate cancer cell lines cultured in normoxic and hypoxic conditions.
Our data indicate a novel mechanism where hypoxia negatively regulates the tumor suppressor function of NEP in prostate cancer.
We showed here that Wnt5a activated Dvl2, Daam1 and RhoA, and promoted migration of breast cancer cells, which was, however, abolished by Secreted Frizzled-related protein 2 (sFRP2) pretreatment.
Taken together, we demonstrated for the first time that Wnt5a promotes breast cancer cell migration via Dvl2/Daam1/RhoA.
Notably, the oncogenic effects of miR-335 and siDAAM1 together with anti-tumor effects of antagomir-335 are also confirmed in human astrocytoma U87-MG cells.
The S-a1A concentration is determining the risk for development of byssinosis.
We found a dose-response relationship between endotoxin exposure and byssinosis, and a significant association between A-1-A serum concentrations less than or equal to 35 mumol/liter and byssinosis, a finding we are further evaluating in subsequent studies.
The level of IgG, IgA, IgM, alpha1-antitrypsin and alpha2-macroglobulin was determined by radial immunodiffusion in 27 workmen in the flax processing industry, exposed to the risk of byssinosis and 33 retired workmen with a diagnosis of byssinosis.
This review summarizes the emerging role of fractalkine/CX3CL1 from a functional and clinical perspective and provides evidence to validate it as a potential therapeutic target in rheumatic diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis, Sjoegren's syndrome, systemic lupus erythematosus, scleroderma, as well as diseases related to vascular inflammation.
To evaluate serum levels of fractalkine (FKN), a mediator of leukocyte transmigration, C-reactive protein (CRP) and expression of integrins CD11a and CD49d on peripheral blood lymphocytes in systemic sclerosis (SSc) and to investigate whether they are modulated by intravenous prostaglandin E1 (PGE1).
Fractalkine may play an important role in the pathogenesis of vascular dysfunction in systemic sclerosis.
Prostaglandin E1 down-regulates serum fractalkine level, as well as CD11a and CD49d expression on peripheral blood lymphocytes, which suggests additional mechanisms in which this vasodilatatory agent exerts its efficacy in systemic sclerosis.
Fractalkine (FKN) and its receptor CX3CR1 are critical mediators in the vascular and tissue damage of several chronic diseases, including systemic sclerosis (SSc) and pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH).
To determine the role of fractalkine and its receptor in systemic sclerosis (SSc) by assessing their expression levels in patients with this disease.
Notably, LipoNP outperformed SNP 1 in terms of pharmacokinetics and in vivo therapeutic efficacy in both human BEL-7402 hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and HCT-116 colorectal cancer-derived xenograft mouse models.
There was no significant difference between Akt1 gene polymorphisms of patients (SNP1, SNP2 and SNP3) with endometrial cancer and controls (p &gt; 0.05).
Difference between alleles frequency of SNP1, SNP2, SNP3 of patients with endometrial cancer and controls was not significant (p &gt; 0.05).
The results showed that SNP -1,687 (T/T) occurred more frequently in the healthy individuals than that in the prostate cancer patients compared to SNP -1,687 (C/C).
In conclusion, SNP -1,687, located in the NKX3.1 binding site within the L-plastin promoter, might reduce the expression of L-plastin and potentially decrease the tumorigenesis and progression of prostate cancer.
Two investigators independently extracted data on study design, patient characteristics, and clinical features (interstitial lung disease [ILD], fever, mechanic's hands [MH], Raynaud's phenomenon [RPh], arthralgia, sclerodactyly, cancer and dermatomyositis-specific rash) according to the presence of myositis-specific (anti-aminoacyl-transfer RNA synthetase [ARS], anti-signal recognition particle [anti-SRP] and anti-Mi2) and myositis-associated (anti-PM/Scl, anti-U1-RNP and anti-Ku) autoantibodies.
To examine serum interleukin 18 (IL-18), fetuin-A, soluble intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (sICAM-1), and endothelin-1 (ET-1) levels in ankylosing spondylitis (AS), psoriatic arthritis (PsA), and Synovitis Acne Pustulosis Hyperostosis Osteitis syndrome (SAPHO).
Therefore, we aim to assess the correlation of endothelin-1 concentrations with the development and severity of knee osteoarthritis (OA).
Notably, inactivating mutations in genes encoding the catalytic and regulatory subunits of the switch/sucrose non-fermenting chromatin remodeling complex have been detected in several solid cancers: sucrose non-fermenting/switch/sucrose non-fermenting-related, matrix-associated, actin-dependent regulator of chromatin, subfamily b, member 1/Brahma-related gene 1-associated factor 47/integrase interactor 1 mutations in rhabdoid tumors; AT-rich interactive domain-containing protein 1 A/Brahma-related gene 1-associated factor 250a mutations in ovarian clear cell carcinoma, hepatocellular carcinoma and gastric adenocarcinoma; polybromo 1/Brahma-related gene 1-associated factor 180 mutations in renal clear cell carcinoma; Brahma-related gene 1/switch/sucrose non-fermenting-related, matrix-associated, actin-dependent regulator of chromatin, subfamily a, member 4 mutations in non-small-cell lung carcinoma and AT-rich interactive domain-containing protein 2/Brahma-related gene 1-associated factor 200 mutations in hepatocellular carcinoma and malignant melanoma.
Highest urinary 1-OHP concentration was observed in digestive tract cancer patients (median 1.25 mymol/mol-Cr) with GSTM-1 genotype.
We found that GSTM1 and GSTT1 null genotypes (GSTT1-/GSTM1-) increased the risk of ESRD by 1.8 times (p &lt; 0.001) and the increased risk of ESRD for GSTM-null (T1+-M1-) genotype was 3.04 times (p = 0.002).
ESRD patients carriers the GST (GSTM1-null + GSTT1-null + GST-null) genotypes compared to GST normal genotype increased the risk of ESRD by 3.3 (p &lt; 0.001) times.
ESRD patients carriers of GST-null, GSTM1-null, and GSTT1-null genotypes had greater MDA concentration compared with the same genotypes of control subjects.
Our results indicated that the GST-null allele (GSTT1-null/GSTM1-null) is a risk factor for ESRD and carriers of this allele have high levels of MDA.
Unlike mouse GSTM1, the human GSTM1 gene tends to be deleted in bladder cancers.
Among 7 human bladder cancer cell lines, GSTM1 gene is really null in 6 cell lines except one, T24 cells.
One is the GSTM1 gene which is down-regulated in mice bladder carcinogenesis and is usually deleted in human urothelial carcinoma, while the other is the GSTM5 gene, which is inactivated by DNA CpG methylation.
The regulation of TSP2 by hypoxia is supported by the in vivo observation that TSP2 has spatiotemporal expression distinct from regions of hypoxia in gastrocnemius muscle following murine hindlimb ischemia (HLI).
These findings identify a novel, ischemia-induced pro-angiogenic mechanism involving the transcriptional repression of TSP2 by HIF-1Alfa.
Therefore, we designed this study to demonstrate the role of THBS-2 and LECT-2 in atherosclerosis at the tissue level in fresh specimens.
The study results suggest that the tissue levels of THBS2 and LECT-2 may correlate with the stage of atherosclerosis.
In the current study, we aimed to evaluate the predictive value of circulating thrombospondin-2 (TSP-2) for cumulative survival in patients with ischemic CHF due to coronary artery disease (CAD).
Knockdown of Klf15 in Foxd1-expressing cells (Foxd1-Cre Klf15fl/fl) increased extracellular matrix deposition and myofibroblast proliferation as compared to wildtype (Foxd1-Cre Klf15+/+) mice after three and seven days of ureteral obstruction.
Kidney fibrosis was induced in FoxD1-GC;Z/Red-mice by unilateral ureteral obstruction followed by FACS sorting of dsRed-positive FoxD1-derivative cells and miRNA profiling.
Serum NT-pCNP is a promising diagnostic biomarker for sepsis but is a poor indicator of septic peritonitis.
Concurrent with the inhibition of Wnt/Beta-catenin signaling, 1-benzyl-I3C strongly down regulated expression of the melanoma master regulator, Microphthalmia Associated Transcription Factor isoform-M (MITF-M) by inhibiting promoter activity through the consensus LEF-1/TCF DNA binding site.
These data allow us to hypothesize a dedifferentiation process of adipocytes toward fibroblast-like cells, which can promote migration of melanoma cells through activation of Wnt5a and the intracellular pathways of Beta-catenin and LEF-1.International Journal of Obesity advance online publication, 24 October 2017; doi:10.1038/ijo.2017.218.
About 90% of the melanoma signature genes belong to an intrinsic network of transcription factors governing neural development (TFAP2A, DLX2, ALX1, MITF, PAX3, SOX10, LEF1, and GAS7) and miRNAs (211-5p, 221-3p, and 10a-5p).
To determine the expression of Beta-catenin, lymphoid enhancer-binding protein-1 (LEF-1), and heparanase-1 (HPA-1) and to evaluate these proteins' potential prognostic values in malignant acral melanoma without mutations in BRAF exons 11 and 15 and NRAS exons 1 and 2, specimens from 90 patients with wild-type BRAF and NRAS were assessed and analyzed by immunohistochemistry and western blotting.
The expression of Beta-catenin, LEF-1, and HPA-1 was assessed and compared in malignant melanoma with that of peritumoral tissue and benign nevus in the patients with negative mutations in BRAF exons 11 and 15 and NRAS exons 1 and 2.
The study may provide the basis for Beta-catenin, LEF-1, and HPA-1 as new targets in the treatment of malignant invasion and metastasis in melanoma cancer.
We identified a panel of novel melanoma-associated markers: frizzled-related protein, an antagonist of Wnt; tranducin-like enhancer of split 1, a transcription factor partner of TCF/LEF-1; CNTN1, an activator of Notch signalling; two Serpin peptidase inhibitors, Serpin B3/B4 and the TGF-Beta family member GDF15, the latter with association to MAPK-signalling.
Calprotectin, eosinophil-derived neurotoxin (EDN), and protein S100A12 were measured in colorectal mucus self-collected following defecation by 58 patients with IBD (before therapy), 50 patients with irritable bowel syndrome, and 33 healthy volunteers.
Calprotectin, EDN, M2PK, soluble cytokeratin 18 and d-dimer showed dramatic increase in a few cases of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) detected among trial participants.
In cancer cell spheroids, SLC4A4 or SLC4A9 disruption by either genetic or pharmaceutical approaches acidified intracellular pH and reduced cell growth.
Although SSCP analysis of 62 WT samples and 10 BWS patients did not result in the identification of any mutations in ORCTL2 or ORCTL2S, it will be important to examine their expression pattern in tumors and BWS patients, since epigenetic alteration at these loci may play a role in the etiology of these diseases.
By Northern blot analysis, the expression of OPN mRNA was increased in pyelonephritis and hydronephrosis models compared with the control, but no changes were observed in dietary-acid or base-loading models.
We aimed to evaluate possible clinical application of urinary monocyte chemotactic protein-1 (MCP-1), osteopontin (OPN), and regulated upon activation, normal T-cell expressed and secreted (RANTES) chemokine as useful noninvasive markers in children with congenital hydronephrosis (HN) caused by ureteropelvic junction obstruction (UPJO).
Characterization of the Fe65L2 gene structure will be useful in the linkage analysis and search for mutations in the Fe65L2 gene in patients with Alzheimer's disease.
This study was designed to shed light on the function of ANGPTL7 in obesity and its modulation by physical exercise as well as its potential association with lipid profile.
In conclusion, our data shows for the first time that obesity increases the level of ANGPTL7 in both plasma and adipose tissue.
Physical exercise reduced the level of ANGPTL7 highlighting the potential for targeting this protein as a therapeutic target for regulating dyslipidemia.
In this study, we recorded event-related potentials (ERPs) from four groups of 36-month-olds: low-risk control (LRC), high risk for ASD defined as having an older sibling with ASD (HRA) but who do not have ASD or milder autism-like symptoms (HRA-Typ), HRA children who do not have ASD but exhibit milder autism-like symptoms (HRA-Atyp) and HRA children diagnosed with ASD (ASD).
The goal of this study was to determine whether unique profiles of psychophysiological responses to such stimuli could be identified in individuals diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder (ASD), with fragile X syndrome (FXS), and with comorbid autism and fragile X syndrome (ASD + FXS), and in typically developing (TYP) individuals.
Mutations in CCBE1 may yield a phenotype not only of lymphatic dysplasia, but also of LCS or fetal hydrops; however, the possibility that the sibling with LCS also carries a homozygous mutation in an unidentified gene influencing cholestasis cannot be excluded.
We performed hierarchical clustering on these profiles to study the extent to which HIV infection associated immune dysfunction, adaptive immune factors (pre-existing influenza-specific antibodies, T cell responses), an innate immune factor (Mannose Binding Lectin, MBL), demographic characteristics (gender, age), or the vaccine preparation (split vs. virosomal) impacted the immune response to influenza vaccination.
The present study provides the first direct comparison of anti-influenza A virus (IAV) activities of the collectins surfactant protein (SP) A and SP-D, mannose-binding lectin (MBL), and conglutinin.
The purpose of this case-control study was to assess the association of abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) in Croatian patients with four genetic polymorphisms: SNP 1166A&gt;C in the angiotensin II type 1 receptor gene (AT1R); SNP -1562C&gt;T in the matrix metalloproteinase-9 gene (MMP-9); the deletion of 32 bp in the chemokine receptor 5 gene (CCR5); and the insertion/deletion (I/D) of 287 bp in the angiotensin-converting enzyme gene (ACE).
The expression status of ZKSCAN3, a zinc-finger transcription factor containing KRAB and SCAN domains, as well as its biological significance, in human bladder cancer remains largely unknown.
In the current study, we aimed to determine the functional role of ZKSCAN3 in bladder cancer progression.
Two bladder cancer cell lines, UMUC3 and 647V, were found to strongly express ZKSCAN3 protein/mRNA, whereas its expression in 5637 bladder cancer and SVHUC normal urothelium cell lines was very weak.
These results suggest that ZKSCAN3 plays an important role in bladder cancer outgrowth.
Thus, ZKSCAN3 inhibition has the potential of being a therapeutic approach for bladder cancer.
Zinc finger with KRAB and SCAN domain 3 (ZKSCAN3) is overexpressed in invasive colorectal cancer (CRC) cells and regulates the expression of several genes favoring tumor progression, including vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and integrin Beta4.
We evaluated the association of ZKSCAN3 and colorectal cancer liver metastasis (CLM) to determine whether it is related to invasive signaling pathways.
Further preliminary data showed that ZKSCAN3 was expressed in a majority of prostate cancer patient samples, but not in normal prostate tissues.
Moreover, the ZKSCAN3 protein is highly expressed in the PC3 prostate cancer cell line, which has high metastatic potential, but little expression was observed in non-metastatic prostate cancer cell lines.
Interestingly, the ZKSCAN3 gene was amplified in 26% (5/19) of metastatic prostate cancers and 20% (1/5) of lymph node metastases, but there was no amplification found in primary prostate cancers, further supporting the role of ZKSCAN3 in tumor cell migration.
Taken together, we provide evidence that ZKSCAN3, a zinc finger transcription factor, plays a critical role in promoting prostate cancer cell migration.
Analysis of a panel of myeloma cell lines, primary patient samples and datasets from Oncomine and the Multiple Myeloma Genomics Portal (MMGP) revealed expression of ZKSCAN3 messenger RNA (mRNA) in a majority of samples.
Conversely, ZKSCAN3 suppression using small hairpin RNAs (shRNAs) reduced cyclin D2 levels, and, importantly, inhibited myeloma cell line proliferation.
Finally, ZKSCAN3 was noted to specifically bind to oligonucleotides representing sequences from the cyclin D2 promoter, and to the endogenous promoter itself in myeloma cells.
Taken together, the data support the conclusion that ZKSCAN3 induction represents a mechanism by which myeloma cells can induce cyclin D2 dysregulation, and contribute to disease pathogenesis.
We previously described the novel zinc finger protein ZKSCAN3 as a new "driver" of colon cancer progression.
ZKSCAN3 was pursued for several reasons: (a) its sequence similarity with bowl required for Drosophila hindgut development; (b) it lies in a chromosomal region (6p22.1) amplified in colorectal cancer; and (c) its coding sequence predicts tandem C(2)H(2) zinc finger domains present in a class of proteins gaining attention for their role in oncogenesis/tumor progression.
Intriguingly, the ZKSCAN3 protein was also expressed in tumors wild-type for genes (APC, p53, K-Ras) commonly targeted in colorectal cancer.
ZKSCAN3 knockdown in two independent colon cancer cell lines impaired anchorage-independent growth and orthotopic tumor growth, whereas overexpression in a third cell line had the opposite effect and increased 5-fluorouracil resistance.
Liposomal delivery of a ZKSCAN3-targeting small interfering RNA reduced tumorigenicity of orthotopic colon cancer.
Thus, the hitherto uncharacterized ZKSCAN3 adds to an expanding set of encoded products contributing to the progression of colorectal cancer.
In line with uncontrolled cell cycle progression in SCLC, we find that CDC25A, B and C mRNAs are expressed at significantly higher levels in SCLC, compared to lung adenocarcinoma.
Despite its documented role in cell cycle regulation, over-expression of the cyclin-dependent kinase activator CDC25A does not consistently correlate with worse cancer patient outcomes or predict successful clinical response to CDC25A inhibition.
The current study was undertaken to investigate CDC25A in skin cancer and understand predictors of positive response to CDC25A targeting.
CDC25A was increased in human squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) associated with a shift from a primarily nuclear localization in skin to a strong cytoplasmic localization in SCC, a pattern that was reproduced in skin cancer cell lines.
Additionally, the CDC25A inhibitors Vitamin K3 or NSC663284 were more toxic to SCC than normal keratinocytes, and CDC25A inhibition effectively suppressed skin cancer growth by increasing apoptosis without affecting normal skin biology.
These studies provide proof-of-concept evidence for the potential of CDC25A inhibitors for skin cancer treatment and suggest that an assessment of the cytoplasmic localization of CDC25A may be a strategy for identification of skin and other cancers susceptible to CDC25A targeting.
Synthesis of twenty nine new 1,2,4-triazoles and some derived thiazolothiadiazoles (structurally-relevant to some reported triazoles with anticancer and/or Cdc25A/B inhibitory activities) is described in this study.
In addition, a number of Desbuquois dysplasia type II patients have been attributed to mutations in xylosyltransferase 1, encoded by the XYLT1 gene, an enzyme that catalyzes the transfer of UDP-xylose (a marker of cartilage destruction) to serine residues of an acceptor protein, essential for the biosynthesis of proteoglycans.
Desbuquois dysplasia type 2 (DBQD2) is a rare recessively inherited skeletal genetic disorder characterized by severe prenatal and postnatal growth retardation, generalized joint laxity with dislocation of large joints and facial dysmorphism.
Patients with SUCLA2 gene defects characteristically develop the trias of early hypotonia, progressive dystonia and sensori-neural deafness.
The authors identified two novel heterozygous missense transitions in the gene for the mitochondrial polymerase gammaA subunit (POLG) in a family with an autosomal recessive syndrome comprising progressive external ophthalmoplegia (PEO), polyneuropathy, ataxia, sensorineural hearing loss, and affective disorders.
Unexpectedly, we found that a set of muscle-specific microRNAs (miRNAs; myomiRs): miR-133, miR-1, and miR-206 was significantly underexpressed in well-differentiated liposarcoma and synovial sarcoma, suggesting that they may function as tumor suppressors as described in muscle-relevant rhabdomyosarcomas.
In this work, we examined the role of the muscle-specific miRNAs miR-1 and miR-206 in human rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS), a soft tissue sarcoma thought to arise from skeletal muscle progenitors.
This study characterized ID4 gene methylation in patients with MDS and aplastic anemia (AA).
The methylation-specific PCR (MS-PCR) and reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR) were applied to identify the methylation status and gene expression of ID4 gene in MDS cell line MUTZ1, a patient with aplastic anemia(AA) and a donor with normal bone marrow (NBM).
To analyze changes in gene amplification in the mitochondrial genome and in the ID4 gene promoter methylation region in patients with chronic aplastic anemia (CAA) suffering from Kidney (Shen) yin deficiency or Kidney yang deficiency.
Methylation-specific PCR (MS-PCR) was used to detect the promoter methylation status of ID4 gene in bone marrow samples from 46 AML patients with different subtypes and stage of disease and from 10 patients with iron deficiency anemia (IDA) as a control.
Id4 methylation was also detected in bone marrow samples from patients with iron deficiency anemia which served as control.
We previously reported a genome-wide association study that identified common SNPs near the CTSO gene and in ZNF423 associated with development of breast cancer during tamoxifen therapy in the NSABP P-1 and P-2 breast cancer prevention trials.
Here, we have investigated their roles in ERAlfa-positive breast cancer growth and tamoxifen response, focusing on the mechanism of CTSO.
A case-control study from two randomised breast cancer prevention trials of tamoxifen and raloxifene (P-1 and P-2) identified single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in or near genes ZNF423 and CTSO as factors which predict which women will derive most anti-cancer benefit from selective oestrogen receptor modulator (SERM) therapy.
Recently, a genome-wide association study identified two single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) near or in the CTSO and ZNF423 genes that were associated with breast cancer risk during tamoxifen therapy.
We then investigated the relationship between CTSO rs10030044 genotypes and mRNA expression levels of CTSO and BRCA1 in 290 breast cancer patients.
We found a positive correlation between the variant GG genotype of CTSO rs10030044 and shorter disease-free survival, or overall survival in hormone receptor-positive breast cancer patients receiving adjuvant tamoxifen therapy.
We show that a SNP near the CTSO gene is a poor prognostic factor in breast cancer although further research might help to reveal the factors linking this genotype and prognosis.
An initial discovery genome-wide association study identified common single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) in or near the ZNF423 and CTSO genes that were associated with breast cancer risk during SERM therapy.
The OR for differences in breast cancer risk during SERM therapy for subjects homozygous for both protective or both risk alleles for ZNF423 and CTSO was 5.71.
The current status of GE pig liver xenotransplantation with world experience, potential factors causing thrombocytopenia, new targets on pig endothelial cells, and novel GE pigs with more genes deletion to avoid remaining antibody response, such as beta1,4-N-acetyl galactosaminyl transferase 2 (Beta4GalNT2), are discussed.
Cis-regulatory variation at the blood group-related glycosyltransferase B4galnt2 is associated with a phenotype in mice that closely resembles a common human bleeding disorder, von Willebrand disease.
Human ARHGAP33 is associated with brain phenotypes and reduced SORT1 expression is found in patients with schizophrenia.
Furthermore, the results of our study revealed that miR-126 is negatively correlated with ADAM9 expression in hepatitis B virus-related hepatocellular carcinoma patients.
Overexpression of miR-126 was shown to attenuate ADAM9 expression in hepatocellular carcinoma cells, which subsequently inhibits cell migration and invasion in vitro.
In conclusion, we demonstrated that the loss of tumor suppressor miR-126 in hepatitis B virus-related hepatocellular carcinoma cells contributes to the development of metastases through the upregulated expression of its target gene, ADAM9.
MiR-126-ADAM9 pathway-based therapeutic targeting may represent a novel approach for the inhibition of hepatitis B virus-related hepatocellular carcinoma metastases.
We previously showed that ADAM9 staining was increased in colon cancer tissues.
In the present work, we investigated the expression pattern of ADAM9 in colon cell lines, and the effects of overexpression ADAM9 on colon cancer proliferation and invasion.
ADAM9 mRNA expression was determined in colon cancer tissues by RT-PCR assay, meanwhile, ADAM9 DNA and protein levels were measured in colon cancer cell lines by PCR and western blot, respectively.
ADAM9 transfection was carried out in HT-29 colon cancer cells, and cell growth was measured by MTT assay, cell invasion ability was assessed by Matrigel assay.
ADAM9 mRNA was upregulated in colon cancer tissues, ADAM9 DNA and protein was overexpressed in Lovo cell lines, while the ADAM9 expression levels in HT-29, HCT-8, and Ls174t cells were below the levels of detection.
These results suggest that ADAM9 contributes to cell invasion and progression in colon cancer.
We also confirmed that miR-203 and oncogene ADAM9 (a disintegrin and metalloproteinase 9)/oncogenic long non-coding RNA HULC (highly up-regulated in liver cancer) were inversely expressed in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) tissues or cell lines.
This study has identified significant regions in the OSCC genome that were amplified and resulted in consequent over-expression of the MGAM and ADAM9 genes that may be utilized as biological markers for OSCC.
Abbreviations used: C: Degree Celsius, ANOVA: Analysis of variance, ATCC: American Type Culture Collection, BCL-2: B-Cell CLL/Lymphoma 2, Bcl-xL: B-cell lymphoma extra-large, BH3: Bcl-2 homology 3, BID: BH3-interacting domain death agonist, BIR: Baculovirus inhibitor of apoptosis protein repeat, Caspases: Cysteinyl aspartate-specific proteases, CDK: Cyclin-dependent kinase, CO2: Carbon dioxide, CST: Cell signaling technologies, DISC: Death-inducing signaling complex, DMSO: Dimethyl sulfoxide, DNA: Deoxyribonucleic acid, DR4: Death receptor 4, DR5: Death receptor 5, E1a: Adenovirus early region 1A, ECL: Enhanced chemiluminescence, EDTA: Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid, ELISA: Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, etc.
We proposed that stuttering candidate genes, DRD2 and SLC6A3, might be associated with dyslexia.
To explore the correlations of dopamine transporter gene (DAT) and dopamine D(2) receptor gene (DRD2) to stuttering.
Since preeclampsia is not known to be associated with an altered water flux to the fetus we propose that AQP9 might not have a key role in water transport in human placenta, but a function in the energy metabolism or the urea uptake and elimination across the placenta.
These results suggest that CFTR expression decreases in preeclampsia and may thus be implicated in the regulation of AQP9 activity.
Much further work is needed to define whether the overexpression of AQP9 plays a direct role either in the pathogenesis or in the adaptative response of preeclampsia.
Specific cross-reacting autoimmunity against recoverin or collapsin response mediator protein (CRMP)-5 is known to cause cancer-associated retinopathy or paraneoplastic optic neuropathy, respectively.
Autoantibodies have defined two paraneoplastic visual disorders related to small-cell lung carcinoma: retinopathy ("CAR"-IgG [23kDa, recoverin]) and optic neuritis collapsin response-mediated protein 5 (CRMP-5-IgG [62kDa]).
Pathogenic relevance of these autoantibodies has been demonstrated only for antibodies against (1) voltage gated calcium channels (VGCC) in Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome, (2) voltage gated potassium channels (VGKC) in neuromyotonia, and (3) recoverin in cancer associated retinopathy.
A number of treatments were shown to be cost-effective, e.g., statin for secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease, aspirin for primary prevention of cardiovascular disease, DOAC for high-risk atrial fibrillation, beta blockers, ACE inhibitors, and ARB for heart failure, sildenafil and bosentan for pulmonary hypertension, CABG for multi-vessel coronary disease, ICD for ventricular tachycardia, and CRT for heart failure with low ejection fraction, while others were not cost-effective, e.g., epoprostenol for pulmonary hypertension and LVAD for end-stage heart failure.
Among those with ischemic stroke (n = 108 699), Chinese patients were less likely than other Canadian patients to fill prescriptions for the combination of ACE inhibitor, diuretic and statin (adjusted odds ratio [OR] 0.64 [95% confidence interval (CI) 0.55-0.74]) and, in those with atrial fibrillation, for warfarin (adjusted OR 0.75 [95% CI 0.59-0.95]).
Significant differences in the local conformations and kinetic properties of heart and lung ACEs demonstrate tissue specificity of ACE and provide a structural base for the development of mAbs able to distinguish heart and lung ACEs as a potential blood test for predicting atrial fibrillation risk.
Split ends (SPEN) is an ERAlfa corepressor that we have identified as a tumor suppressor protein in ERAlfa-positive breast cancer cells whose hormone-independent roles in breast cancer have never been explored.
We determined the hormone-independent transcriptional program regulated by the ERAlfa cofactor SPEN in breast cancer using DNA microarrays.
The biological functions regulated by SPEN independently of hormones were studied in vitro in ERAlfa-positive and ERAlfa-negative breast cancer cells.
Finally, we examined the clinical relevance of SPEN expression in cohorts of breast cancer samples with outcome data.
Finally, we found that high SPEN RNA levels were predictive of early metastasis in two independent cohorts of 77 (HR 2.25, P = 0.03) and 170 (HR = 2.23, P = 0.004) patients with ERAlfa-negative breast cancer.
Together, our data demonstrate a role for SPEN in the regulation of primary cilia formation and cell migration in breast cancer cells, which may collectively explain why its expression is associated with time to metastasis in cohorts of patients with ERAlfa-negative breast cancers.
BACKGROUND The reciprocal translocation t(1;22)(p13;q13) involving the RBM15 and MKL1 genes is an uncommon abnormality that occurs in a subset of acute myeloid leukemia with megakaryocytic differentiation (AMKL).
Three genes with mutations were known cancer associated genes (BAP1, ARHGAP35 and SPEN), but they were mutated in a single sample each, and were missense variants with uncertain functional effects.
Here, we report that an antisense RNA, AS-RBM15, is transcribed in the opposite direction within exon 1 of RBM15 RBM15 is a regulator of megakaryocyte (MK) differentiation and is also involved in a chromosome translocation t(1;22) in acute megakaryocytic leukemia.
Tremor was the sole initial manifestation in some individuals with ANO3 mutations, leading to misdiagnosis as essential tremor.
After a series of molecular docking and molecular dynamics simulation were performed, we concluded that SAH-M1356 ligand is the most potential SAH-based compound to inhibit NS5 methyltransferase enzyme for treating dengue fever.
Dengue virus NS5 also binds SLAs from different serotypes, indicating that NS5 recognizes the overall shape of SLA as well as specific nucleotides.IMPORTANCE Dengue virus is an important human pathogen responsible for dengue hemorrhagic fever, whose global incidence has increased dramatically over the last several decades.
This NS5 ELISA can also be used to distinguish between primary and secondary dengue fever on the basis of IgM/IgG ratios.
Druggable pockets in Dengue Fever Virus and West Nile Virus NS3 and NS5 are retained in predicted Zika virus structures.
In this study we isolated one Dengue virus 1 serotype, named BR/Alfenas/2012, from a patient with dengue hemorrhagic fever in Alfenas, South Minas Gerais, Brazil and molecular identification was performed based on the analysis of NS5 gene.
The aim of this study was to investigate MC populations expressing tryptase and c-kit in lip squamous cell carcinoma (lip SCC) (n=37), actinic cheilitis (AC) (n=15) and normal lip mucosa (control) (n=6), as well as their relationship with microscopic parameters (collagen degeneration, elastin changes, angiogenesis and proliferative index).
In control and gingivitis patients, leukocyte elastase and cathepsin G had high comparable elastin solubilizing activities.
With young and aged periodontitis patients, the two serine proteinases had weak elastin solubilizing activities.
On the other hand, we believe that tumor depth of invasion (&gt;=4 mm), POI, and VEGF-C expression all need to be considered in the preoperative and postoperative planning stages for tongue cancer treatment.
This study aimed to determine the relationship of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) and vascular endothelial growth factor-c (VEGF-C) expression with lymphangiogenesis, lymph node metastasis (LNM), and other clinicopathologic features in human oral tongue cancers.
Forty tongue cancer specimens were immunohistochemically examined for COX-2 and VEGF-C expression and for lymphatic vessel density (LVD).
Our results suggest that examination of immunohistochemical expression of COX-2 and VEGF-C predicts LNM and survival in human oral tongue cancers.
The use of a therapeutic approach which blocks lymphangiogenic factors, such as VEGF-C and VEGF-D, may be beneficial in suppressing the lymphatic spread of tongue cancer with intense intranodal lymphangiogenesis.
A short hairpin RNA (shRNA)method was used to knock down COX-2 gene expression and investigate the relationship between COX-2 and VEGF-C, and the role of the COX-2 gene for proliferation and invasion was also investigated in the tongue cancer cell Tca8113.
VEGF, VEGF-C, VEGF-D and MIA expression levels of metastatic tongue cancer HSC-3 cells were higher than those with no metastatic HSC-4 cells, and VEGF, VEGF-C and VEGF-D expression levels were decreased by MIA siRNA treatment in both cells.
Here, we identify SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma-derived exosomes comprised of major histocompatibility complex II (MHC II), Hsp90 and flotillin-1.
We investigated the associations between genetic polymorphisms in aquaporin 4 (AQP4, rs2075575), aquaporin 5 (AQP5, rs3736309), and estrogen receptor Alfa (ERAlfa1, rs2234693; ERAlfa2, rs9340799) and susceptibility to Meniere's disease or SSNHL.
The AQP5 polymorphism entailed no significant risk of SSNHL and the polymorphisms of AQP4, ERAlfa1, and ERAlfa2 entailed no significant risk of Meniere's disease or SSNHL in the additive genetic model, regardless of adjustments for age and sex.
mRNA was extracted from the surgically acquired utricles from subjects with Meniere's disease and acoustic neuroma to conduct quantitative real-time reverse transcription with polymerase chain reaction for AQP1, AQP4, and AQP6.
AQP4-IR localized to the epithelial basolateral supporting cells in Meniere's disease, acoustic neuroma, and autopsy.
In specimens from subjects with Meniere's disease, AQP4-IR was significantly decreased compared with autopsy and acoustic neuroma specimens.
Expression of AQP1, AQP4, or AQP6 mRNA did not differ in vestibular endorgans from patients with Meniere's disease.
Changes in AQP4 (decreased) and AQP6 (increased) expression in Meniere's disease specimens suggest that the supporting cell might be a cellular target.
Interleukin-13 (IL-13) has recently been reported to be a potential cytokine in the pathogenesis of minimal-change nephrotic syndrome (MCNS).
Our established interleukin-13 ( IL-13 ) overexpression rat model of minimal change-like nephropathy provided a platform to study the molecular signalling pathways in T-helper 2 (Th2) cytokine associated minimal change nephrotic syndrome.
Clinical and experimental data indicate roles for cytokines IL-13, TNFAlfa, circulating cardiotrophin-like cytokine factor 1 (member of the IL-6 family), circulating hemopexin, radical oxygen species, and the soluble urokinase-type plasminogen activator receptor (suPAR) in the development of nephrotic syndrome.
The aim of this study was to investigate whether pathologic changes in zonula occludens-1 (ZO-1) are induced by interleukin-13 (IL-13) in the experimental minimal-change nephrotic syndrome (MCNS) model and to determine whether montelukast, a leukotriene receptor antagonist, has an effect on ZO-1 restoration in cultured human podocytes.
Serum IgE and IL-13 levels were estimated in 40 idiopathic nephrotic syndrome and 16 controls.
Serum IgE and IL-13 levels were significantly increased in active nephrotic syndrome and its sub-groups as compared to controls and remission (p &lt; 0.001).
Thus, raised levels of IgE and IL-13 are found in nephrotic syndrome and could have a role in the pathogenesis of disease.
Consistent with these associations, a role for interleukin-13 with minimal change disease has been proposed.
Furthermore, overexpression of the T(H)2 cytokine interleukin 13 in rats induces minimal change disease.
We conducted a retrospective pharmacogenomic analysis of a prospectively collected community-based cohort of patients with estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer to test for associations between low-activity CYP2D6 genotype and disease outcome in 500 patients treated with adjuvant tamoxifen monotherapy and 500 who did not receive any systemic adjuvant therapy.
Tamoxifen, a hormonal therapy drug against estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer, can be metabolized by cytochrome P450 enzymes such as CYP3A4 and CYP3A5, and converted to N-desmethyltamoxifen, which is subsequently, metabolized by CYP2D6 and inverted to form 4-hydroxy-N-desmethyltamoxifen (endoxifen).
Tamoxifen, the most frequently used drug for treating estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer, must be converted into active metabolites to exert its therapeutic efficacy, mainly through CYP2D6 enzymes.
Cardiomyopathy [methylmalonic (MMA) and propionic aciduria (PA)], prolonged QTc interval (PA), optic nerve atrophy [MMA, isovaleric aciduria (IVA)], pancytopenia (PA), and macrocephaly [glutaric aciduria type 1 (GA1)] were exclusively found in OAD patients, whereas hepatic involvement was more frequent in UCD patients, in particular in argininosuccinate lyase (ASL) deficiency.
Spinocerebellar ataxia type 7 (SCA7) is caused by an abnormal CAG repeat expansion and includes cerebellar signs associated with visual loss and ophthalmoplegia.
The following clinical features have some specific values for predicting a gene defect: slowing of saccades in SCA2, ophthalmoplegia in SCA1, SCA2 and SCA3, pigmentary retinopathy in SCA7, spasticity in SCA3, dyskinesias associated with a mutation in the fibroblast growth factor 14 (FGF 14) gene, cognitive impairment/behavioral symptoms in SCA17 and DRPLA, seizures in SCA10, SCA17 and DRPLA, peripheral neuropathy in SCA1, SCA2, SCA3, SCA4, SCA8, SCA18 and SCA25.
There were characteristic clinical features such as hypotonia and optic atrophy for SCA1; hyporeflexia for SCA2; nystagmus, bulging eye, and dystonia for SCA3; and macular degeneration for SCA7.
This case illustrates a rare association of atrophic maculopathy and external ophthalmoplegia in Machado--Joseph disease, contrasted with the common occurrence of retinal degeneration in spinocerebellar ataxia 7.
Pure-tone audiometry confirmed normal-hearing thresholds (&gt;or=15 dB HL) at 0.5, 1.0, 2.0, 3.0, 4.0, 6.0, and 8.0 kHz in NH-Ss and NH-Cs, and confirmed mild, high frequency, sensorineural hearing loss in HI-Ss (HI-Ss were included only to estimate sensitivity and specificity values for preliminary pass or fail criteria that could be used to help identify NH-Ss at risk for music-induced hearing loss).
The disease intervals for Nance-Horan syndrome (NHS [MIM 302350]) and X linked congenital cataract (CXN) overlap on Xp22.
The X-linked congenital cataract (CXN) locus has been mapped to a 3-cM (approximately 3.5 Mb) interval on chromosome Xp22.13, which is syntenic to the mouse cataract disease locus Xcat and encompasses the recently refined Nance-Horan syndrome (NHS) locus.
The t(9;11) has been described in patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML), and two genes [AF9 (at 9p21) and FBP17 (at 9q34)] have been cloned as fusion partners of the MLL gene.
In the subsequent studies, we investigated the possible effects of the tested anticancer agents on the DOX-reducing activities of the most potent enzymes (AKR1C3, CBR1 and AKR1A1) and on the DOX metabolism driven by MCF7, HepG2 and human liver cytosols.
We employed this approach to quantitatively determine the 6 AKR proteins, AKR1A1, AKR1B1, AKR1B10, AKR1C1/C2, AKR1C3, and AKR1C4, in 7 different cancer cell lines and for the first time to obtain the absolute quantities of all the AKR proteins in each cell.
The staining patterns for nidogen and heparan sulfate proteoglycan were examined in 11 patients with either junctional, dominant dystrophic, or recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa, and were found to be not different from the patterns observed in normal skin.
Our data identify ITCH as a novel component of the ATM-dependent signaling pathway and suggest that the impairment of the correct functionality of ITCH caused by Atm deficiency may contribute to the complex clinical features linked to Ataxia Telangiectasia.
The expected abnormalities were easily found in samples from patients with purine nucleoside phosphorylase deficiency, ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency, molybdenum cofactor deficiency, adenylosuccinase deficiency, or dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency.
To investigate the role of a defective 8-oxo-G repair we performed a germline mutation screening in the genes OGG1, MTH1 and MUTYH, in 81 patients with a clinical phenotype ranging from attenuated or atypical adenomatous polyposis coli including hyperplastic polyps to hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) type X syndrome without mono- or biallelic mutations in either APC, MUTYH or the DNA mismatch repair genes.
MYH, OGG1 and MTH1 are members of base excision repair (BER) families, and MYH germline mutations were recently identified in patients with multiple adenomas or familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP).
A total of 19 hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC), 86 suspected HNPCC, and 246 sporadic colorectal cancer cases were investigated for OGG1 and MYH mutations.
Seven risk factors were significantly associated with severe pneumonia, including body temperature, respiratory rate, C-reactive protein, elastase, exotoxin-A, exoenzyme-U and multidrug resistances.
The prediction models were developed with polytomous logistic regression differentiating "pneumonia" and "other SBIs" from "non-SBIs" using standardized, routinely collected data on clinical signs and symptoms, CRP, and procalcitonin.ResultsA total of 1,085 children were included with a median age of 1.6 years (interquartile range 0.8-3.4); 73 children (7%) had pneumonia and 98 children (9%) had other SBIs.
In this study we transmitted the disease from a series of 12 French atypical scrapie isolates in a transgenic mouse model (TgOvPrP4) overexpressing in the brain approximately 0.25, 1.5 or 6x the levels of the PrP(ARQ) ovine prion protein under the control of the neuron-specific enolase promoter.
Transgenic Tg(OvPrP4) mice, which express the ovine prion protein (PrP) gene under the rat neuron-specific enolase promoter on a knockout background, were used to study prion extracerebral circulation after scrapie prions were inoculated via the intracerebral (ic) and the intraperitoneal (ip) route.
Here, two ovine transgenic mouse lines (TgOvPrP4 and TgOvPrP59), expressing the ovine PrP (A136 R154 Q171) under control of the neuron-specific enolase promoter, were studied; they were challenged with brainstem or spinal cord from experimentally BSE-infected sheep (AA136 RR154 QQ171 and AA136 RR154 RR171 genotypes) or brainstem from cattle BSE and natural sheep scrapie.
To investigate the role of PrP expression in different cell types on pathology in retina and brain after scrapie infection, we examined transgenic mice expressing hamster PrP from the PrP promoter (tg7), the neuron-specific enolase promoter (tgNSE), or the astrocyte-specific glial fibrillary acidic protein promoter (tgGFAP).
After intraocular inoculation with hamster scrapie, clinical disease developed in tg7 and tgNSE mice by 100 days and in tgGFAP mice by 350 days.
Recently, several variants of BCOR and BCOR-like 1 (BCORL1) chimeric fusion transcripts were reported in human cancers, including acute promyelocytic leukemia, bone sarcoma, and hepatocellular carcinoma.
In addition, massively parallel sequencing has identified inactivating somatic BCOR and BCORL1 mutations in patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML), myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), chronic myelomonocytic leukemia, medulloblastoma, and retinoblastoma.
(10 isolates) and 14 other yeast species (24 isolates), using a 4-hour urea broth test (Remel), a 24-hour urea broth test (Becton Dickinson), a 4-hour caffeic acid disk test (Hardy Diagnostics and Remel), 40- to 44-hour growth assessment on l-canavanine glycine bromothymol blue (CGB) agar, and intergenic spacer (IGS) sequence analysis.
gattii isolates (98%) within 4 h. CGB agar or IGS sequencing further differentiated these isolates within 48 h. On CGB, 25 of 27 (93%) C. gattii strains induced a blue color change, in contrast to 0 of 86 C. neoformans isolates.
Low expression of SDHB strongly was correlated with T classification, clinical stage and cranial nerve palsy.
Metabolic disorders appear to result in neuropsychiatric illness either through disruption of late neurodevelopmental processes (metachromatic leukodystrophy, adrenoleukodystrophy, GM2 gangliosidosis, Niemann-Pick type C, cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis, neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis, and alpha mannosidosis) or via chronic or acute disruption of excitatory/inhibitory or monoaminergic neurotransmitter systems (acute intermittent porphyria, maple syrup urine disease, urea cycle disorders, phenylketonuria and disorders of homocysteine metabolism).
We report mainly on metachromatic leukodystrophy, GM2 gangliosidosis, Fabry's disease, Niemann-Pick type C, Kufs disease, adrenoleukodystrophy, cerebro-tendinous xanthomatosis.
The variations of cerebrospinal fluid-free amino acids observed in coma have been compared with those reported by other authors in patients affected by epilepsy, multiple sclerosis, infantile amaurotic idiocy (GM2-gangliosidosis) and phenylketonuria.
Infiltrates of five cases of mycosis fungoides (MF) were studied for the presence of cells reactive with a monoclonal antibody, OKT 6, which detects an antigen present on relatively immature thymocytes and Langerhans cells.
Twelve cases (Mycosis fungoides, Sezary syndrome, cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, chronic lymphocytic leukemia) were OKT3'T4', ie, expressed the phenotype commonly associated with mature T-helper cells.
Fourteen neoplasms with diverse histopathologic features, T-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia, mycosis fungoides, the Sezary syndrome, T-immunoblastic sarcoma, and a pleomorphic large-cell lymphoma, expressed the T helper cell phenotype, OKT3+T4+.
Neoplastic lymphocytes from patients with varying phases of cutaneous T cell lymphoma (mycosis fungoides, Sezary syndrome and related presentations) were reactive with OKT1 and OKT3 (pan T cell reagents) and OKT4 (an antibody defining the functional "helper" T cell subset).
The presence of an OKT1+, OKT3+, OKT4+, OKT5-, OKT8- phenotype on the neoplastic T lymphocytes of cutaneous T cell lymphoma (CTCL) supports the clinical impression that all phases of CTCL represent a single disease entity.
NHL of T-lymphocytes detailed in respect of mycosis fungoides and Sezary syndrome (OKT-3, OKT-4, OKT-11), to subtypes of T-CLL with particular emphasis on the "azurophilic" type, to T-zone NHL, and to adult T-cell leukaemia/lymphoma (OKT-3, OKT-4, OKT-11, anti-tac), all of them with the usual immunological phenotype of T-helper (TH) lymphocytes.
OKT 9 reactive cells were identified in all cases of mycosis fungoides examined, in one case of lymphomatoid papulosis, one of two cases of Sezary syndrome, and one of ten cases of large plaque atrophic parapsoriasis.
Because cutaneous melanoma is a malignant tumor associated with poor prognosis, we investigated the expression of c-erbB-2 protein in cutaneous melanoma and in melanoma metastatic to the skin.
The expression of c-erbB-2 protein in 20 primary cutaneous melanomas and in 10 melanomas metastatic to the skin was investigated using a semi-quantitative immunohistochemical assay.
c-erbB-2 overexpression does not appear to play a role in the development of primary cutaneous melanoma or in the development of metastatic melanoma, indicating that mechanisms other than c-erbB-2 overexpression are involved in the pathogenesis of cutaneous melanoma.
ASPM, RFC4, C3orf26, BXDC2, C15orf44, AURKA, C20orf77, and RBMX were upregulated in immortalized cells, cancer cells, and non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) tissues.
Similarly to il2ra(-/-) mice, DKO showed reduced numbers of regulatory T cells and, consequently, hyper-activation and proliferation of T cells associated with inflammatory disease (ie, colitis), weight loss, and reduced survival.
These data infer that targeted depletion of cells expressing the IL-2 receptor has therapeutic potential in models of inflammatory colitis, despite depletion of CD25(+) Treg.
We report 2 cases of sudden BCR/ABL1+ blast crisis in patients with CML who had achieved complete hematologic remission with imatinib therapy but were obligated to discontinue therapy owing to pancytopenia.
We demonstrated that Tg mice expressing AID in the skin spontaneously developed skin squamous cell carcinoma with Hras and Trp53 mutations.
In the current study, the expression of C/EBPalpha was evaluated in seven mouse skin squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) cell lines that contain oncogenic Ha-Ras.
In addition, an activated H-ras gene was detected in a human keratoacanthoma by using a nude mouse tumorigenesis assay after transfection of tumor DNA into NIH 3T3 cells.
A mouse skin squamous cell carcinoma induced by topical application of the direct-acting alkylating agent beta-propiolactone contains an activated H-ras oncogene with an A----T transversion at the second nucleotide of codon 61.
Anemia is an important and common problem associated with chronic kidney disease (CKD), which is caused by erythropoietin deficiency, iron-restricted erythropoiesis, inflammation, hypoxia, vitamin D deficiency, hyperparathyroidism, and obesity.
The relation may guide physician to suspect hyperparathyroidism in chronic kidney disease patients and manage the complications related to hyperparathyroidism like renal mineral bone disease, anemia resistant to erythropoietin.
The responsiveness to recombinant human erythropoietin in hemodialysis (HD) patients with relative hypoparathyroidism [4 &lt;= intact parathyroid hormone (iPTH) &lt;=16.5 pmol/L] remains undetermined.
If other factors related to anemia are excluded in chronic HD patients, the lower the iPTH level (relative hypoparathyroidism) the better the responsiveness to recombinant human erythropoietin.
Given that P2RX7-dependent LP and HSP90 are critically interacting in the ATP-evoked autophagic death of dystrophic muscles, treatments targeting this axis could be of therapeutic benefit in this debilitating and incurable form of muscular dystrophy.
The focus is especially on the molecular fate of HSPs cardiovascular HSP (HSPB7), AlfaBC (HSPB5), HSP70 (HSPA) and HSP90 (HSPC) in dystrophin-deficient muscles and their involvement in progressive muscular dystrophy.
Regenerating muscle fibers of IIM and muscular dystrophy patients showed increased expression of HSP90 and HSP70, as did atrophic perifascicular muscle fibers of DM and vacuolated fibers of IBM.
The 90-kD heat-shock protein (hsp90) and ubiquitin are up-regulated in regenerating fibers and diseased fibers of Duchenne muscular dystrophy.
All OMG patients with higher MJ and PAOF values should also be screened for thymoma.
Age of onset (p = 0.034), the onset symptom of ocular MG (OMG; p = 0.023), the first symptom of OMG second generalization (p = 0.040) were different in MG with thymoma from those in MG with normal thymus or thymus hyperplasia.
Here, we analyzed surface markers CXCR5, Bcl-6, ICOS and IL-21 on TFH cells in thymus derived from thymoma patients with ocular MG (OMG), generalized MG (GMG) or without MG using immunohistochemical staining, immunofluorescence, western blotting, and real-time PCR analysis.
Indeed, results show higher expression of all four markers in thymoma with GMG patients compared with both OMG and non-MG patients.
Three sub-groups of patients were highlighted: (i) severe, symptomatic chronic neutropenia, detected early in life, and related to a known mutation in the CN spectrum (ELANE); (ii) mild to moderate benign intermittent neutropenia, detected later, and associated with mutations in genes implicated in neurodevelopmental disorders (CHD2, HUWE1); and (iii) moderate to severe intermittent neutropenia as a probably undiagnosed feature of a newly reported syndrome (KAT6A).
SSc patients with arthritis, elevated IgG titer, ESR &gt;30 mm/h, and CRP &gt;5 mg/l displayed elevated expression of TL1A, respectively.
The interaction of TL1A and DR3 may participate in the pathogenesis of some autoimmune diseases including rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
The purpose of this study was to explore the role of TNF-like ligand 1A (TL1A) gene (TNFST15) polymorphisms (rs3810936, rs7848647, and rs6478109) in the generation of ankylosing spondylitis (AS).
TNF-like ligand 1A (TL1A), a recently recognized member of the TNF superfamily, and its death domain receptor 3 (DR3), firstly identified for their relevant role in T lymphocyte homeostasis, are now well-known mediators of several immune-inflammatory diseases, ranging from rheumatoid arthritis to inflammatory bowel diseases to psoriasis, whereas no data are available on their involvement in sarcoidosis, a multisystemic granulomatous disease where a deregulated T helper (Th)1/Th17 response takes place.
Intranasal immunization with plasmid pCIA-P encoding pac gene successfully reduces the caries and appears to be a promising approach against dental caries.
Mutations in the PGAP2 gene cause hyperphosphatasia mental retardation syndrome-3.
Among them, mutations in PIGV and PIGO, which are involved in the late stages of GPI-anchor synthesis, and PGAP2, which is involved in fatty-acid GPI-anchor remodeling, are all causative for hyperphosphatasia with mental retardation syndrome (HPMRS).
Three different genes of the glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchor synthesis pathway, PIGV, PIGO, and PGAP2, have recently been implicated in hyperphosphatasia-mental retardation syndrome (HPMRS), also known as Mabry syndrome, a rare autosomal recessive form of intellectual disability.
We developed a diagnostic gene panel for targeting all known genes encoding proteins in the GPI-anchor-synthesis pathway to screen individuals matching these features, and we detected three missense mutations in PGAP2, c.46C&gt;T, c.380T&gt;C, and c.479C&gt;T, in two unrelated individuals with hyperphosphatasia with mental retardation syndrome (HPMRS).
We performed autozygosity mapping and ultra-deep sequencing followed by stringent filtering and identified two homozygous PGAP2 alterations, p.Tyr99Cys and p.Arg177Pro, in seven offspring with nonspecific autosomal-recessive intellectual disability from two consanguineous families.
Detailed issues of diagnosing and treatment of many rare diseases were also presented, among others Wilson disease, Alstroem syndrome, Cohen syndrome, Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome, Cornelia de Lange syndrome, Poland syndrome, Netherton syndrome, inborn aniridia and congenital arhinia - very rare defect requiring further scientific studies.
However, the value of RPS4X as a diagnostic and prognostic marker in intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (ICC) has not yet been investigated.
RFX6 heterozygotes have reduced penetrance of diabetes compared to common HNF1A and HNF4A-MODY mutations (27, 70 and 55% at 25 years of age, respectively).
Our study demonstrates that heterozygous RFX6 protein truncating variants are associated with MODY with reduced penetrance.Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is the most common subtype of familial diabetes.
As childhood obesity is a concern in many communities, this study investigated outpatient evaluation and initial management of overweight and obese pediatric patients in U.S. military medical treatment facilities (MTFs).
Eighteen MtFs developed hyperprolactinemia (&gt;=0.6 IU L-1 ).
Mitchell-Riley syndrome, an autosomal recessive disorder caused by mutations in the RFX6 gene, is defined as a combination of neonatal diabetes mellitus and serious congenital gastrointestinal defects.
We identified 236 tagSNPs in 9 key genes related to SOCCs and ROCCs (TRPC1, TRPC3, TRPC4, TRPC6, TRPC7, ORAI1, ORAI2, STIM1, and STIM2) and evaluated their association with lung cancer risk in a two-stage case-control study with a total of 2433 lung cancer cases and 2433 cancer-free controls using Illumina high throughput genotyping platform.
Using ex vivo models of disease we demonstrated that FB28.4.2 protected paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria erythrocytes from complement-mediated hemolysis and inhibited both C3 fragment and C5b-9 deposition on ADP-activated HMEC-1 cells, an experimental model for atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome.
Of 214 eligible participants recruited between Sept 1, 2010, and March 31, 2012, 189 had a confirmed diagnosis of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis and were included in subsequent analyses.
KRT5 and KRT6 (KRT6A, KRT6B &amp; KRT6C) gene expression was assessed in publically available serous ovarian cancer data sets, ovarian cancer cell lines and primary serous ovarian cancer cells.
Survival analyses showed that high KRT5 mRNA in stage III/IV serous ovarian cancers was significantly associated with reduced progression-free (HR 1.38, P &lt; 0.0001) and overall survival (HR 1.28, P = 0.013) whilst high KRT6 mRNA was only associated with reduced progression-free survival (HR 1.2, P = 0.031).
KRT5 but not KRT6C mRNA expression was increased in chemotherapy resistant primary serous ovarian cancer cells compared to chemotherapy sensitive cells.
The incidences of grades 3-4 neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, leukopenia, anemia, deep vein thrombosis, diarrhea, fatigue and rash were 51% (95% CI 30-73%), 31% (95% CI 20-42%), 9% (95% CI 5-13%), 7% (95% CI 2-12%), 3% (95% CI 2-5%), 3% (95% CI 1-5%), 2% (95% CI 1-4%) and 2% (95% CI 1-3%), respectively.
Mowat-Wilson syndrome (MWS) is a genetic disease characterized by distinctive facial features, moderate to severe intellectual disability, and congenital malformations, including Hirschsprung disease, genital and eye anomalies, and congenital heart defects, caused by haploinsufficiency of the ZEB2 gene.
Eight of these changes affect KMT2D, ZEB2, MAP2K2, GLDC, CASK, MECP2, KDM5C, and POGZ, known to be associated with Kabuki syndrome 1, Mowat-Wilson syndrome, cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome, glycine encephalopathy, mental retardation and microcephaly with pontine and cerebellar hypoplasia, X-linked mental retardation 13, X-linked mental retardation Claes-Jensen type, and White-Sutton syndrome, respectively.
In humans, SIP1 (ZEB2) haploinsufficiency leads to Mowat-Wilson syndrome, a complex congenital anomaly including intellectual disability, epilepsy and Hirschsprung disease.
We report the first confirmed cases of MWS in three children with the typical facial features, mental retardation, absent corpus callosum, epilepsy, and HSCR and novel Zeb2 variations on DNA analysis.
Hence, this review is focused to describe thirteen common aminoacidopathies namely: Phenylketonuria (PKU), Maple Syrup Urine Disease (MSUD), Homocystinuria/Methylene Tetrahydrofolate Reductase (MTHFR) deficiency, Tyrosinemia type II, Citrullinemia type I and type II, Argininosuccinic aciduria, Carbamoyl Phosphate Synthetase I (CPS) deficiency, Argininemia (arginase deficiency), Hyperornithinemia-Hyperammonemia-Homocitrullinuria (HHH) syndrome, N-Acetylglutamate Synthase (NAGS) deficiency, Ornithine Transcarbamylase (OTC) deficiency, and Pyruvate Dehydrogenase (PDH) complex deficiency.
These include N-acetylglutamate synthase deficiency (NAGSD); Carbamyl phosphate synthetase 1 deficiency (CPS1D); Ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency (OTCD); Argininosuccinate synthetase deficiency (ASSD) (Citrullinemia); Argininosuccinate lyase deficiency (ASLD) (Argininosuccinic aciduria); Arginase deficiency (ARGD, Argininemia); Hyperornithinemia, hyperammonemia, homocitrullinuria (HHH) syndrome (or mitochondrial ornithine transporter 1 deficiency [ORNT1D]); and Citrullinemia type II (mitochondrial aspartate/glutamate carrier deficiency [CITRIN]).
Polymorphisms in TLR1 (R80T), NOD2 (1007fsX1), and MYD88 (-938C&gt;A) were associated with chronic Q fever.
Polymorphisms in TLR1 (R80T), NOD2 (L1007fsX1), and MYD88 (-938C&gt;A) are associated with predisposition to development of chronic Q fever.
For TLR1, increased interleukin 10 responses to C. burnetii in individuals carrying the risk allele may contribute to the increased risk of chronic Q fever.
In sum, SCIN ablation in mice leads to exacerbated ritualistic-like behaviors that affect social performance, providing a link between SCIN dysfunction and the social impairments present in psychiatric disorders.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT We sought to uncover the impact of striatal cholinergic interneuron (SCIN) degeneration on perseverative behaviors related to obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) and Tourette syndrome (TS).
Therefore, perseveration induced by SCIN ablation extends to social performance as occurs in neuropsychiatric conditions such as OCD and TS.
Expression analysis of glutamate receptor subunits NR1-NR3B, GluR1-GluR7, KA1, KA2 and mGluR1-mGluR8 was performed by means of RT-PCR in human rhabdomyosarcoma/medulloblastoma (TE671), neuroblastoma (SK-NA-S), thyroid carcinoma (FTC 238), lung carcinoma (SK-LU-1), astrocytoma (MOGGCCM), multiple myeloma (RPMI 8226), glioma (U87-MG and U343), lung carcinoma (A549), colon adenocarcinoma (HT 29), T cell leukemia cells (Jurkat E6.1), breast carcinoma (T47D) and colon adenocarcinoma (LS180).
The neuroprotective potential of mGluR1 and mGluR5 antagonists (group I), EMQMCM and MTEP, respectively was studied using the 3 min forebrain ischemia model in Mongolian gerbils and the hypoxia-ischemia model in 7-day-old rats.
Thus, the antagonists of mGluR1 and mGluR5 show differential neuroprotective ability in two models of brain ischemia.
MGlu1 receptor antagonists are promising drugs for the treatment of brain ischemia or for the prophylaxis of neuronal damage induced by synaptic hyperactivity.
DREAM contains an E2F, a retinoblastoma (RB)-family protein, and the MuvB core (LIN9, LIN37, LIN52, LIN54, and RBBP4).
This study aimed to identify predictors for shunt-dependent hydrocephalus (SDHC) after aSAH via a systematic review and meta-analysis.
In primary analysis of 14 potential risk factors, 12 were identified as predictors of SDHC after aSAH including age &gt;=50 years, female gender, high Hunt-Hess grade, Glasgow Coma Scale &lt;=8, Fisher grade &gt;=3, acute hydrocephalus, external ventricular drainage insertion, intraventricular hemorrhage, postcirculation aneurysm, anterior communicating artery aneurysm, meningitis, and rebleeding.
OBJECTIVE Feasible clinical scores for predicting shunt-dependent hydrocephalus (SDHC) after aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage (aSAH) are scarce.
The chronic hydrocephalus ensuing from SAH score (CHESS) was introduced in 2015 and has a high predictive value for SDHC.
The SDASH score was developed from results of multivariate analysis, which revealed acute hydrocephalus (aHP), a BNI score of &gt;= 3, and a Hunt and Hess (HH) grade of &gt;= 4 to be independent risk factors for SDHC (ORs 5.709 [aHP], 6.804 [BNI], and 4.122 [HH]; p &lt; 0.001).
All 3 SDHC scores tested (CHESS, BNI, and SDASH) reliably predicted chronic hydrocephalus (ORs 1.533 [CHESS], 2.021 [BNI], and 2.496 [SDASH]; p &lt;= 0.001).
CSF drainage also reduced angiographic vasospasm (OR of 0.35, 95% CI, 0.23-0.51, P &lt; 0.01), symptomatic vasospasm (OR of 0.32, 95% CI, 0.32-0.43, P &lt; 0.01), and DIND (OR of 0.48, 95% CI, 0.25-0.91, P = 0.03), but there was no significant difference between the CSF drainage group and the no CSF drainage group on shunt-dependent hydrocephalus (SDHC) prevention (OR of 1.04, 95% CI, 0.52-2.07, P = 0.91).
Under the hypothesis that compartmentalization occurs between the ventricle and subarachnoid space after massive SAH, this study aimed to evaluate the biochemical differences between ventricular and intrathecal cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and assess the role of CSF lactate in shunt-dependent hydrocephalus (SDHC) after aneurysmal SAH.
The objective of this study was to compare the incidence of ventricular shunt placement for shunt-dependent hydrocephalus (SDHC) after clipping versus coiling of ruptured aneurysms.
Excluding anti-Ro52, 113 (89.3%) SSc patients were positive for at least one autoAb: anti-Topoisomerase I (anti-Topo) I abs in 54 (41.2%), anti-centromere proteins (anti-CENP) in 37 (28.2%, all reactive with centromere protein-A (CENPA) and centromere protein B (CENPB)), anti-RNA polymerase III(RP11) in 19 (14.5%), anti-RNA polymerase III(RP155) in 13 (9.9%), anti-fibrillarin in 4 (3.1%), anti-Ku in 6 (4.6%), anti-nucleolus-organizing region (anti-NOR90) in 8 (6.1%), anti-PM-Scl100 in 2 (1.5%), and anti-PM-Scl75 in 4 (3.1%).
Overall, 102 (77.9%) SSc patients had autoAbs against Topo I, CENPA or CENPB, RP11 or RP155.
Reactivity to UL83 HCMV was assessed in relation to clinical manifestations and SSc-related autoantibodies (autoAbs), tested by an IgG SSc autoantibody profile line immunoassay (Euroimmun) that detects autoAbs against Scl-70, CENPA, CENPB, RNA polymerase III subunit 11 (RP11), RP155, fibrillarin, NOR90, Th/To, PM-Scl100, PM-Scl75, Ku, PDGFR and Ro-52.
The EUROLINE (IgG) Systemic Sclerosis panel test kit (which tests for Scl-70, CENP-A, CENP-B, RP11, RP155, Fib, NOR90, Th/To, PM100, PM75, Ku, PDGFR and Ro-52) was selected for the purpose of this study.
Of these lcSSc patients, 31 (75.6%) were positive for CENP-A and CENP-B (anti-centromere) antibodies, 12 (29.3%) for Ro-52 antibodies, 5 (12.2%) for RP11 and RP155, 4 (9.8%) for Scl-70 and 1 (2.4%) each for anti-Fib and Th/To antibodies.
The following marker antibodies were determined: anti-topo I, anti-centromere A and B (CENP A, CENP B), anti-RNA polymerase III (RP11, RP 155), anti-fibrillarin (U3RNP), anti- -NOR90, anti-Th/To, anti-PM-Scl-100, anti-PM-Scl-75, anti-Ku, anti-Ro-52, anti-PDGFR.
82 patients (94%) had positive antinuclear antibodies; anti-topo I - 29 patients; anti-CENP-A - 20 and anti-CENP-B - 20; anti-RP11 - 9 and anti-RP155 - 7; anti-U3RNP - 1; anti-NOR90 - 6; anti-Th/ To - 3; anti-PM-Scl-100 - 7; anti-PM-Scl-75 - 11; anti-Ku - 5; anti-Ro-52 - 23 patients.
The sensitivity and the specificity of this assay were as follows: 30.5% and 97.3% for ACA (anti-CENP-B), 29.5% and 96% for ACA (anti-CENP-A), 20% and 99.3% for ATA, 5.7% and 99.3% for anti-RNAP III (RP-155), 5.2% and 100% for anti-RNP III (RP-11), 6.7% and 98% for anti-PMScl (PMScl-100), 10.9% and 93.3% for anti-PMScl (PMscl-75), 3.3% and 98.7% for anti-Th/To, 0.48% and 100% for AFA, 4.8% and 96.7% for anti-hUF/NOR-90, 4.7% and 96% for anti-Ku, 0.95% and 100% for anti-Platelet-Derived Growth Factor Receptor, and 18.1% and 50% for anti-Ro-52, respectively.
Sestrins (Sesns) family, which including three members Sesn1, Sesn2 and Sesn3, is known as stress-inducible proteins and participate in multiple diseases via regulating oxidative stress, inflammatory response and cell apoptosis.
Moreover, SESTRIN1 is a direct target of the lymphoma-specific EZH2 gain-of-function mutation (EZH2Y641X ).
The antitumor efficacy of pharmacological EZH2 inhibition depends on SESTRIN1, indicating that mTORC1 control is a critical function of EZH2 in lymphoma.
Hence, SESTRIN1 contributes to the genetic and epigenetic control of mTORC1 in lymphoma and influences responses to targeted therapies.
Microgravity-induced gene expression changes of lipocalin 2 (Lcn2), sestrin 1(Sesn1), phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, regulatory subunit polypeptide 1 (p85 alpha) (Pik3r1), v-maf musculoaponeurotic fibrosarcoma oncogene family protein B (Mafb), protein kinase C delta (Prkcd), Muscle Atrophy F-box (MAFbx/Atrogin-1/Fbxo32), and Muscle RING Finger 1 (MuRF-1) were further validated by real time qPCR analysis.
The expression of Sesn1, Sesn2, and Sesn3 was significantly higher in patients with permanent atrial fibrillation (PmAF) than that in sinus rhythm (SR), and further greater in the left atrium than the right in PmAF patients.
In this study, we evaluated the concentrations of sesn1 and sesn2 in the serum of 41 Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients, 27 mild cognitive impairment (MCI), and 60 elderly controls, by surface plasmon resonance, which was validated by using western blot.
Results of multivariate analysis indicated that age (p = 0.005), maximum cystometric capacity (MCC; p = 0.002), detrusor overactivity (DO; p = 0.001), pelvic organ prolapse (POP; p = 0.018), recurrent urinary tract infection (p = 0.001), and radical abdominal hysterectomy (RAH; p &lt; 0.001) as independent prognostic factors.
Furthermore, our study results indicate that the MCC, urinary tract infection, and a history of RAH have a positive correlation with LCB, whereas, age, POP, and DO have a negative correlation with LCB.
To determine, by means of a retrospective cohort study, the incidence of urinary tract infection (UTI), duration of postoperative hospital stay, and time to trial of voiding in women catheterized suprapubically or transurethrally after RAH for early stage cervical cancer.
The tumor-associated antigen Kita-Kyushu lung cancer antigen-1 (KK-LC-1) has been reported as not being expressed in normal tissues, except for the testis, and in the setting of non-small cell lung cancer.
For example, HORMAD1, CXorf61, ACTL8, and PRAME are highly enriched in the basal subtype of breast cancer; MAGE and CSAG are most frequently activated in the magnoid subtype of lung adenocarcinoma; and PRAME is highly upregulated in the ccB subtype of clear cell renal cell carcinoma.
The expression of Melanoma antigen (MAGE)-A3, MAGE-A4, and Kita-Kyushu lung cancer antigen-1 (KK-LC-1) was positive in 34 (25.0%), 22 (16.2%), and 42 (30.9%) patients, respectively.
In the present study, the expressions of CT antigens (MAGE-A3, MAGE-A4, NY-ESO-1 and KK-LC-1) in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) were analyzed by RT-PCR.
The expression rates of MAGE-A3, MAGE-A4, NY-ESO-1 and KK-LC-1 were 23.8%, 20.1%, 10.5% and 32.6% in patients with NSCLC, respectively.
Expression of MAGE-A3, NY-ESO-1 or KK-LC-1 did not affect survival of patients with NSCLC significantly, however, expression of at least one of such CT antigens negatively affect survival of patients with NSCLC (p=0.045).
The gene consisted of 556 bp, including an open reading frame consisted of 113 amino acids, designated as Kita-kyushu lung cancer antigen 1 (KK-LC-1).
I provide an example of two kallikreins (KLK6 and KLK10), which are highly elevated in serum of 3%-5% of pancreatic cancer patients at 100% specificity.
Our results suggest that KLK10 may serve as a new marker of unfavourable prognosis of colorectal cancer.
Since KLKs are promising tumor biomarkers, the examination of KLK10 mRNA expression and its association with colorectal cancer (CRC) progression was studied using semi-quantitative PCR.
Nine KLKs (KLK5-8, KLK10, KLK11, KLK13-15) were measured using ELISA assays in cytosolic extracts of 122 colon cancer tissues and their nearby normal mucosa, obtained during surgery.
Previous studies suggested an upregulation of KLK10 and KLK6 in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC).
The aims of this study were to demonstrate expression and single nucleotide polymorphisms of KLK10 in colorectal cancer (CRC) and gastric cancer (GC), and to correlate the relative KLK10 expression level with clinicopathological factors of CRC and GC.
To demonstrate expression and single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) of human kallikrein 10 (KLK 10) in colorectal cancer (CRC) and to correlate the KLK 10 expression level with clinicopathological factors of CRC.
When investigating possible gene expression network partners of WT1 in a large acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patient cohort, one of the genes with the highest correlation to WT1 was quinolinate phosphoribosyltransferase (QPRT), a key enzyme in the de novo nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+) synthesis pathway.
Upon overexpression in leukemic K562 cells, QPRT conferred partial resistance to the anti-leukemic drug imatinib, indicating possible anti-apoptotic functions, consistent with previous reports on glioma cells.
We discovered several ENZ (PYCR1, QPRT, and HSPA6) and PPI (CASC5, ZBTB32, and CSAD) binding sites on proteins that have been seldom explored in cancer.
Based on our comparison of human QPRT structures in the apo and complex forms, we propose a drug design strategy targeting malignant glioma.
Human malignant glioma cells, but not nonneoplastic astrocytes, expressed quinolinic acid phosphoribosyltransferase (QPRT) to use quinolinic acid for NAD(+) synthesis and prevent apoptosis when de novo NAD(+) synthesis was blocked.
Oxidative stress, temozolomide, and irradiation induced QPRT in glioma cells.
These findings have implications for therapeutic approaches inducing intracellular NAD(+) depletion, such as alkylating agents or direct NAD(+) synthesis inhibitors, and identify QPRT as a potential therapeutic target in malignant gliomas.
The specificity of the antibody was validated by western blot analysis In gene expression analysis QPRT was detected as differently expressed between follicular thyroid adenoma and follicular thyroid carcinoma.
QPRT protein could be detected by immunohistochemistry in 65% of follicular thyroid carcinomas including minimal invasive variant and only 22% of follicular adenomas.
To analyze retinal thickness (RT) and choroidal thickness (ChT) changes in patients with unilateral nongranulomatous acute anterior uveitis (AAU) using three-dimensional (3D) 1060-nm optical coherence tomography (OCT).
Refraction under cycloplegia, axial length, and subfoveal ChT were measured at baseline with comparative investigations at 15 months follow-up.
PurposeTo follow choroidal thickness (ChT) over time in birdshot retinochoroiditis (BRC) using enhanced depth imaging optical coherence tomography (EDI-OCT) and study the effect of early and sustained treatment on ChT.Patients and methodsEighteen patients were included and EDI-OCT measurements of ChT were analyzed retrospectively in five groups of patients with follow-up times ranging from 1 year to &gt;=15 years.
To investigate the changes in choroidal thickness (ChT) following panretinal photocoagulation (PRP) for diabetic retinopathy (DR) and compare ChT in relation to DR severity.
The central field ChT of severe NPDR (323.2 +/- 61.3 mym) was significantly thicker than that of normal (248.3 +/- 70.7 mym) and mild to moderate NPDR (230.0 +/- 70.3 mym, P = 0.0455 and 0.0099, respectively).
ChT of severe NPDR and PDR was significantly thicker than that of mild to moderate NPDR.
Ten cases of presumed endophthalmitis were documented: 4 in 50,721 at CHT (95% CI: 0.0071-0.0087%), 2 in 44,666 at ZUH (95% CI: 0.0039-0.0051%), and 4 in 39,314 at UCB (95% CI: 0.0092-0.011%).
To investigate longitudinal changes in intraocular pressure (IOP), axial length (AL), and choroidal thickness (ChT) in primary open-angle glaucoma (POAG) eyes after trabeculectomy and to evaluate the parameters that might influence those changes.
The association between subfoveal ChT and systemic, as well as ocular factors, including age, sex, height, weight, body mass index, axial length, refractive error, intraocular pressure, preterm history, and the refractive status of parents were studied.
ChT differed significantly between males and females 2-mm temporal to the fovea in the emmetropia group (P&lt;0.05), and 1-mm temporal to the fovea in the mild myopia group (P&lt;0.05).
Further analysis indicates that TNFAIP2, as a single diagnostic marker, is more sensitive (sensitivity=87%) and specific (specificity=96%) than TRAF1, nuclear cRel, or CD23 for distinguishing the malignant B cells of primary mediastinal (thymic) large B-cell lymphoma from those of its morphologic and immunophenotypic mimic, diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, not otherwise specified.
We demonstrate that the expression of TRAF1 and activated c-Rel, two proteins that function in signaling events downstream of activated CD30 in Reed-Sternberg cells, reliably distinguish classical Hodgkin lymphoma from anaplastic large cell lymphoma, nodular lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin lymphoma, and nonmediastinal diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.
In contrast, strong TRAF1 staining was present in only 1 of 17 cases of anaplastic large cell lymphoma, 0 of 15 cases of lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin lymphoma, and 2 of 36 cases of nonmediastinal diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.
Only some cases of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma showed a moderate to high TRAF1 signal.
The association of GWAS-identified obesity risk alleles (FTO, MC4R, SH2B1, BDNF, INSIG2, TNNI3K, NISCH-STAB1, MTIF3, MAP2K5, QPCTL/GIPR, and PPARG) with dietary intake, measured through food-frequency questionnaires, was investigated in 2075 participants from the Look AHEAD (Action for Health in Diabetes) clinical trial.
FEEL-1/stabilin-1 is a multifunctional transmembrane glycoprotein that is implicated in bacterial infection, diabetes, atherosclerosis, wound healing, and innate immunity.
Our study analyzed the RNA cargoes of EVs derived from 4 liver-cancer cell lines: HuH7, Hep3B, HepG2 (hepato-cellular carcinoma) and HuH6 (hepatoblastoma), generating two different sets of sequencing libraries for each.
The efficiency of AZA on inhibition of proliferation differs in the evaluated cell lines as follows: HepG2 (an experimental model of hepatoblastoma)&gt;Hep3B (derived from a hepatocellular carcinoma)&gt;HuH6 (derived from a hepatoblastoma)&gt;&gt;HuH7 (derived from a hepatocellular carcinoma)=Chang Liver cells (a non-malignant cellular model).
HBF-0079 caused irreversible growth arrest and apoptosis of the HCC lines Huh7, Hep3B, HepaRG as well as the hepatoblastoma line HepG2, with CC50 values from ~0.7-7.7 myM, while more than 45 myM was needed to achieve CC50 values for the immortalized normal hepatocyte lines THLE-2 and PH5CH.
Hepatoma Hep3B and Huh7 cells displayed stronger ATX expression than hepatoblastoma HepG2 cells and normal hepatocytes did.
Eight databases (Embase, Medline, CINAHL, Web of Science, PsychInfo, ASSIA, ERIC and ProQuest Dissertations) were searched in 2016 to identify qualitative studies exploring children's views about self-managing diabetes.
Only 25% of double compound Gata4/Gata5 heterozygotes survive to adulthood and these mice have aortic stenosis.
Our findings confirm that IR exists in gout patients and implicate that febuxostat can effectively control the level of serum UA and increase insulin sensitivity in primary gout patients.
The study demonstrated compensatory hyperinsulinemia and insulin resistance, hypoadiponectinemia, hyperleptinemia, left ventricular hypertrophy, diastolic dysfunction, and intact ventricular contractility in patients with type 2 diabetes, gout, and their combination.
Teneurin transmembrane protein 1 (TENM1) expression was highly upregulated in cancerous tissues and negative in benign thyroid tissues.
By immunohistochemistry, TENM1 expression in papillary thyroid cancer was associated with the classical subtype (p = 0.018), extrathyroidal invasion (p = 0.001), BRAF V600E mutation (p &lt; 0.001), and an advanced stage (p = 0.019).
Taken together, our results indicate that distinct pathways are involved in papillary thyroid cancer progression, and TENM1 is a potential marker of cancer progression.
We describe that ODZ1 (also known as TENM1), a type II transmembrane protein involved in fetal brain development, plays a crucial role in the invasion of GBM cells.
The intracellular fragment of ODZ1 promotes cytoskeletal remodelling of GBM cells and invasion of the surrounding environment both in vitro and in vivo.
Absence of ODZ1 by gene deletion or downregulation of ODZ1 by small interfering RNAs drastically reduces the invasive capacity of GBM cells.
Overexpression of ODZ1 in GBM cells reduced survival of xenografted mice.
Consistently, analysis of 122 GBM tumour samples revealed that the number of ODZ1-positive cells inversely correlated with overall and progression-free survival.
ODZ3 deletion was detected in seven eGBMs and two ePXAs.
Higher p14 mRNA transcript levels were associated with non-cancerous background tissue specimens (median copy numbers: 103 vs. 4, p=0.0095), with better overall and disease-free survival, and in TNM2 stage tumours (TNM2 vs. TNM1, 27.2 vs. 3.5, p=0.049; TNM1/TNM2 vs. TNM3/4, 26 vs. 2, p=0.009).
Since glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD) is a candidate primary autoantigen, we examined the possible linkage between IDDM and the genes encoding GAD65 (GAD2, 10p11-12) and GAD67 (GAD1, 2q31) in 58 Danish IDDM affected sib pairs.
In addition, chronic lymphocytic leukemia patients with unmutated IGHV and high COBLL1 show impaired motility and chemotaxis towards CCL19 and CXCL12 as well as enhanced B-cell receptor signaling pathway activation demonstrated by increased PLCGamma2 and SYK phosphorylation after IgM stimulation.
The results suggested that DEGs, including IL6, STAT1, MMP9, SYK, BLNK, PLCG2 and CD79B, and the pathways of B cell receptor signaling, Epstein-Barr virus infection and transcriptional misregulation in cancer have strong potential to be useful as targets for diagnosis or treatment of cHL.
Clinical examination indicated he had a history of latent syphilis with negative nontreponemal and specific antitreponemal IgM tests.
No target TP-IgM was detected in subjects with latent syphilis.
Compared with primary syphilis, secondary and latent syphilis showed a slower serological response of VDRL (P = .092 and P &lt; .001) and Pathozyme-IgM tests (P &lt; .001 and P = .012).
The overall sensitivity of the IgM-PoCT was 82% and varied with clinical stage, being highest in secondary (10/10 EIA positives) but lower in primary (2/4 EIA positives) and early latent syphilis (2/3 EIA positives).
In 72 cases of early latent syphilis, the Murex EIA screening test was positive in 68 (94%) patients, the Mercia IgM EIA in 50 (69%) cases, the VDRL in 61 (85%) cases and the TPPA in 68 (94%) cases.
Many example illustrate the lack of impact of genetic information on the treatment outcome: we do not treat Dravet syndrome more successfully since SCN1A testing became available; we do not treat Lafora disease more successfully since testing for laforin and malin became available; we do not need to know the genetic nature of Unverricht-Lundborg disease or test for the cystatin B mutation in order to select or avoid certain drugs; we do not treat Rett syndrome more successfully since MECP2 testing became available; we do not treat JME more successfully since we know its genetic origin; we do not treat autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy more successfully since we know its genetic origin and can test for its mutation.
We detected anti-periplakin IgG antibodies in 47/260 (18 %) patients with asthma, with no association with severity or atopy.
Whether periplakin autoimmunity (both IgG and IgE auto-antibodies) is involved in asthma pathogenesis remains to be studied during the disease course of these patients.
Recent genome-wide association studies have shown associations between variants in loci (4q28.1, 6p21.32, 6p21.1, 6q16.1, 10q22.1 and 10q22.3) and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) or smoking behaviors.
A remarkable decrease in the expression of palmitoylated proteins, functionally related to axonal elongation (GAP43, CRMP1 and NEFM) and of the synaptic marker SNAP25, specifically in SH-p.wtCLN1 cells was confirmed by immunoblotting.
This study aimed to investigate the association between the synaptosomal-associated protein 25 kDa (SNAP-25) genotype and performance on the continuous performance test (CPT) in Korean children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).
Our results suggest the possible involvement of the SNAP-25 1065 T&gt;G polymorphism in the inattention phenotype in children with ADHD.
Notably, these neoplasms shared significant associations with 5 ADs (immune thrombocytopenic purpura, polymyositis/dermatomyositis, rheumatoid arthritis, Sjogren syndrome and systemic lupus erythematosis).
We have investigated a possible association between recurrence of otitis media and low concentrations of mannan-binding protein (MBP) in plasma and upper-airway secretions.
Moreover, genetic polymorphisms associated with low MBP plasma levels were investigated in DNA from nasopharyngeal tonsils of 89 children with recurrence of otitis media.
Thus, our results do not support the assumption that low concentration and/or MBP deficiency alone predispose to recurrence of otitis media in Caucasian children.
The expressions of DVL-3 mRNA and Delta-catenin mRNA were significantly higher in malignant than in benign lung disease (P &lt; 0.01) and were obviously higher than cytology in adenocarcinoma (P &lt; 0.01).
Furthermore, SERPINB12 mRNA and protein increase significantly in GE of cancerous ovaries of laying hens with epithelia-derived ovarian cancer.
Serum alkaline phosphatase (ALP) (EC 3.1.3.1), 5'nucleotidase (5'NT) (EC 3.1.3.5), aldolase (ALD) (EC 4.1.2.13) and sorbitol dehydrogenase (SDH) (EC 1.1.1.14) were estimated in infective hepatitis, alcoholic hepatitis, chronic active hepatitis, obstructive jaundice, cirrhosis of liver and amoebic liver abscess.
Although ADH activity under pathological conditions usually parallels that of other enzymes, e.g., sorbitol dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.1.14) (SDH) and alanine transaminase (EC 2.6.1.2) (ALT), its relative elevation above the upper normal limit is generally greater, particularly in the early stages of viral hepatitis.
have determined the levels of argininesuccinatolyase (ASAL), sorbitoldehydrogenase (SDH) and guanase (GUA) in 65 cases of hepatitis of infancy, by comparison with the corresponding levels of transaminases.
Through the use of AhR-CA mice, whose keratinocytes express constitutively active AhR and that develop atopic-dermatitis-like phenotypes, we identified Artn as a keratinocyte-specific AhR target gene whose product (the neurotrophic factor artemin) was responsible for epidermal hyper-innervation that led to hypersensitivity to pruritus.
AhR activation and ARTN expression were positively correlated in the epidermis of patients with atopic dermatitis.
There was a positive association between transferrin saturation &gt;45% and the severity of periodontitis (adjusted odds ratio = 5.49, p = .002).
The aim of the present investigation was to evaluate changes in the transferrin serum levels subsequent to non-surgical treatment of chronic periodontal disease.
The mean transferrin serum level in patients with chronic periodontitis (213.1 +/- 9.2 mg/dL) was significantly less than that in periodontally healthy subjects (307.8 +/- 11.7 mg/dL).
The decrease and increase in transferrin serum levels with periodontal disease and periodontal treatment, respectively, indicated an inverse relationship between transferrin serum levels and chronic periodontitis.
In this study, C.rectus was detected and quantified by using 16s rDNA based PCR in chronic periodontitis and compared with the levels of serum iron, total iron binding capacity and transferrin in chronic periodontitis and healthy sites.
TIBC and transferrin levels were elevated in periodontitis.
Here we report that the transcriptional modulator megakaryocytic leukemia 1 (MKL1) is associated with a histone H3K4 methyltransferase activity.
Five novel in-frame fusion transcripts were identified and verified in 40 EACs and in a validation cohort of 15 additional EACs (55 patients in all): fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2)-GRB2-associated binding protein 2 (GAB2) in 2 of 55 or 3.6%, Niemann-Pick C1 (NPC1)-maternal embryonic leucine zipper kinase (MELK) in 2 of 55 or 3.6%, ubiquitin-specific peptidase 54 (USP54)-calcium/calmodulin dependent protein kinase II Gamma (CAMK2G) in 2 of 55 or 3.6%, megakaryoblastic leukemia (translocation) 1 (MKL1)-fibulin 1 (FBLN1) in 1 of 55 or 1.8%, and CCR4-NOT transcription complex subunit 2 (CNOT2)-chromosome 12 open reading frame 49 (C12orf49) in 1 of 55 or 1.8%.
Previously we have reported that the transcriptional regulator megakaryocytic leukemia 1 (MKL1) plays a role programming cellular inflammatory response by modulating NF-KB activity.
Both (megakaryoblastic leukemia)/myocardin-like 1 (MKL-1) and Signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) have been implicated in the control of cellular metabolism, survival and growth.
BACKGROUND The reciprocal translocation t(1;22)(p13;q13) involving the RBM15 and MKL1 genes is an uncommon abnormality that occurs in a subset of acute myeloid leukemia with megakaryocytic differentiation (AMKL).
We show here that megakaryocytic leukemia 1 (MKL1) is an epigenetic mediator of TNF-Alfa-induced proinflammatory transcription.
We identified that among the candidate targets, twinfilin (TWF1) rescues the miR-206 phenotype in invasion by enhancing the actin cytoskeleton dynamics and the activity of the mesenchymal lineage transcription factors, megakaryoblastic leukemia (translocation) 1 (MKL1), and serum response factor (SRF).
This was a rare case of sarcoidosis associated with symptomatic tumoral calcinosis and hypercalcemia.
This is the third case of tumoral calcinosis with sarcoidosis documented in the literature.
However, these are the first published bone and gallium scans in a patient with a history of sarcoidosis and tumoral calcinosis.
In disorders of overadaptation, the intestinal tract absorbs excessive amounts of Ca due to overproduction of 1,25-D, as in absorptive hypercalciuria, sarcoidosis, primary hyperparathyroidism, and tumoral calcinosis.
In all, 153 patients met the preliminary diagnostic criteria for PSR: transient worsening of residual poststroke focal neurologic deficits or transient recurrence of prior stroke-related focal deficits, admission magnetic resonance imaging showing a chronic stroke but no acute infarct or hemorrhage, no evidence of transient ischemic attack or seizure, no acute lesion on diffusion-weighted imaging, and no clinical or electroencephalographic evidence of seizure around the time of the event.
The PSR features identified in the study should enable prompt diagnosis and distinguish recrudescence from mimics, such as transient ischemic attacks, migraine, Todd paralysis, and Uhthoff phenomenon.
Prolonged inhibition of PSR after ischemia has been shown to be a sensitive marker of neuronal cell damage.
MiR-639 has been reported to act as tumor promoter in various types of cancer.
However, the biological function and underlying molecular mechanism of miR-639 in thyroid carcinoma (TC) have not been intensively investigated.
To address this question, TSCC cell lines SCC9 and CAL27 were treated with human recombinant TGFBeta1 for 48 h. miRNA microarray illustrated that miR-639 was significantly downregulated in TGFBeta-treated SCC9 cells.
Clinically, reduced miR-639 expression was associated with metastasis in TSCC and poor patient survival.
The data from the present study suggest that reduced expression of miR-639 underscores the mechanism of TGFBeta-induced EMT in TSCC by targeting FOXC1 and may serve as therapeutic targets in the process of metastasis.
In this study, we have first confirmed that miR-639 is up-regulated in metastatic breast cancer tissues and cell line with highly invasive capacity.
Furthermore, we provided evidence to demonstrate that up-regulation of miR-639 contributes breast cancer invasion and metastasis.
These data reveal a key role of miR-639 in breast cancer metastasis and support biological and clinical links between miR-639 and breast cancer.
The analysis of serum microRNA levels in the marker identification cohort indicated that serum miR-141 and miR-639 levels were increased in bladder cancer patients compared to CTRL.
The analysis of these miR-141 and miR-639 in the validation cohort demonstrated that microRNA levels were similar in bladder cancer patients and control subjects.
The genotypes of three DNA sequence variants in exons 1a1, 7 and 11 of the GABABR1 gene were assessed in 234 German controls and 350 German alcohol-dependent subjects, including three more homogeneous subgroups of alcoholics, marked by (1) history of parental alcoholism (n = 121); (2) history of alcohol withdrawal seizure or delirium (n = 108); and (3) comorbidity of dissocial personality disorder (n = 60).
Patients with hyposmia had older age (p = 0.001), later onset age (p = 0.020), higher SCOPA-AUT scores (p = 0.011), higher percentage of chronic constipation (p = 0.001) and cpRBD (p = 0.003).
Myocardial MIBG uptake correlated significantly (p &lt; 0.05) with several items of the SCOPA-AUT scale (in female patients: perspiration during the night, in male patients: sum score, saliva dribbling of the mouth, difficulty swallowing, fainting, constipation), of the standardized medical history (in male patients: swollen ankles) and of the autonomic nervous system testing (all patients: sum score, Ewing orthostasis test).
Self-report assessments included Beck's Depression Inventory (BDI), Spielberger Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI), Scales for Outcomes in Parkinson's disease-Autonomic (SCOPA-AUT), Modified Constipation Assessment Scale (MCAS) and Freezing of Gait Questionnaire (FOG-Q).
Among the global scales, the Scales for Outcomes in PD-Autonomic (SCOPA-AUT) and Nonmotor Symptoms Questionnaire for PD (NMSQuest) both met criteria for Recommended, and the Nonmotor Symptoms Scale (NMSS) met criteria for Suggested; however, none specifically focuses on the target gastrointestinal symptoms (sialorrhea, dysphagia, and constipation) of this report.
The main clinical signs of the rabbits were depression, reduction in body temperature and intermittent diarrhea and the hematological findings observed were elevation in WBC, RBC, PCV, TP, BUN, AST, AUT and creatinine values and reduction in glucose, K+ and pH of blood.
It is believed to result from a combination of paralytic ileus of the transverse colon and spasm of the ascending colon, and once appreciated, becomes a valuable asset in the plain film assessment of appendicitis.
A structural and functional interaction between A(2A) adenosine receptors and D(2) dopamine receptors has been implicated in the pathophysiology of impulse control disorders.
Recent studies have suggested the involvement of the dopaminergic system in addictions and impulse control disorders and associations of dopamine receptor genes (DRD1, DRD2, and DRD4) and PG have been reported.
To explore the correlation between effect of PIO (pioglitazone, PIO) on learning as well as memory and ERK1/2 (extracellular signal regulated kinase 1/2, ERK1/2) pathway in T2DM (type 2 diabetes mellitus, T2DM) rats, further to elucidate the potential mechanism of PIO in improvement of learning and memory.
This report demonstrates the utilization of a suite of soluble OTP(n) reagents for facile (triazolyl)methylation of 10 MACOS-derived sultam scaffolds in purification-free process for parallel synthesis of small molecule collections for HTS.
All the recruited members were screened for 3 exons (8, 20, and 21) of KIF21A mutations using the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification and direct sequencing of corresponding PCR products.All patients shared the clinical characteristics including bilateral ophthalmoplegia, blepharoptosis, hypertropic, and exotropic position with inability to raise either eye above the midline and a chin-up head position.
CFEOM presents with congenital ptosis and restricted eye movements, and can be caused by heterozygous missense mutations in the kinesin motor protein KIF21A or in the Beta-tubulin isotypes TUBB3 or TUBB2B.
Congenital fibrosis of the extraocular muscles (CFEOM1) is classically a congenital, non-progressive, restrictive strabismus syndrome characterized by bilateral ptosis and ophthalmoplegia with an infraducted position of the globes.
CCDDs have been associated with dominant or recessive monogenic mutations in at least 7 different genes (CHN1, SALL4, HOXA1, KIF21A, PHOX2A, TUBB3, ROBO3) that cause phenotypes such as Duane retraction syndrome, congenital fibrosis of the extraocular muscles, and horizontal gaze palsy with progressive scoliosis.
Secondly, we tested whether adrenomedullary function is altered in children with SAA, as it is in congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) also causing adrenal hyperandrogenism.
Among the hospitalized patients with diagnostic code of PUB, we ruled out patients with endoscopic removal of gastric adenoma or peritonitis, and selected patients who had been administered intravenous proton pump inhibitor.
In IPMN with low-grade, intermediate-grade, high-grade dysplasia, associated carcinoma, the expression of hsa-miR-96 was 67%(9/13), 64%(7/11), 43%(3/7) and 27%(7/26) respectively, while the expression of hsa-miR-217 was 77%(10/13), 64%(7/11), 29%(2/7) and 38%(10/26).
Abnormal expression of hsa-miR-96 and of hsa-miR-217 was observed in premalignant lesions (PanINs and IPMNs) of pancreatic carcinoma and down-regulated with increasing grades of PanINs and IPMNs.
However, the expression and role of miR-217 in the development of cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (cSCC) remain unclear.
Fluorescence in situ hybridization and quantitative real-time PCR were conducted to profile the cell distribution and expression of circ-TTBK2 and microRNA-217 (miR-217) in glioma tissues and cells.
Stable knockdown of circ-TTBK2 or overexpression of miR-217 glioma cell lines (U87 and U251) were established to explore the function of circ-TTBK2 and miR-217 in glioma cells.
MiR-217 was downregulated in glioma tissues and cell lines.
Moreover, reintroduction of miR-217 significantly reversed circ-TTBK2-mediated promotion of glioma progression.
HNF1Beta was a direct target of miR-217, and played oncogenic role in glioma cells.
Herein, we found that the expression of miR-217 was significantly down-regulated in glioma tissues as compared with adjacent normal brain tissues.
Clinical association analysis disclosed that low-expression of miR-217 was evidently negative associated with advanced tumor stage (grade III + IV) in glioma.
Further function assays showed that miR-217 inhibited proliferation, colony formation, invasion and migration of glioma cells.
Notably, runt-related transcription factors 2 (Runx2) was identified as a functional target of miR-217 in glioma.
Furthermore, an inverse correlation between miR-217 and Runx2 expression was observed in glioma tissues.
Taken together, these results suggest a critical role of miR-217 in suppressing proliferation, migration, and invasion of glioma by targeting Runx2.
Expression levels of miR-21, miR-34a and miR-198 were significantly higher, whereas levels of miR-217 were significantly lower in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas compared to healthy tissues and tissues of chronic pancreatitis.
Prominent among differentially expressed genes were miR-375, miR-217 and miR-216a, which were found overexpressed in SCLC compared to lung adenocarcinomas.
We therefore investigated whether succinate receptor 1 (SUCNR1) could play a role in the development of adipose tissue inflammation and type 2 diabetes.
Our results reveal that activation of SUCNR1 in macrophages is important for both infiltration and inflammation of adipose tissue in obesity, and suggest that SUCNR1 is a promising therapeutic target in obesity-induced type 2 diabetes.
G-protein-coupled receptor 91 is a BMP6 target and Hjv deletion enhances BMP signaling in retina, thus underscoring a role for excess iron and hemochromatosis in abnormal retinal vascularization.
To develop the first radiotracer targeting GPR91, a cell membrane-bound receptor that modulates the cellular response to hyperglycemia and hypoxia, we designed and prepared a small series of compounds based on a published series of 1,8-naphthyridines with high affinity to GPR91.
Sucnr1 deletion also protected mice from obesity on HFD, but only during the initial period; at later stages, body weight of HFD-fed Sucnr1(-/-) mice was almost comparable with wild-type (WT) mice, but WAT content was greater.
These findings suggest that Sucnr1 is a sensor for dietary energy and raise the interesting possibility that protocols to modulate Sucnr1 might have therapeutic utility in the setting of obesity.
In this study, we examined the signaling pathways involved in GPR91-dependent VEGF release during the early stages of retinal vascular change in streptozotocin-induced diabetes.
Our data suggest that hyperglycemia causes succinate accumulation and GPR91 activity in retinal ganglion cells, which mediate VEGF-induced retinal vascular change via the ERK1/2/COX-2/PGE2 pathway.
This study has been performed to evaluate the chemopreventive efficacy of vanillic acid (a bio flavonoid) on endometrial carcinoma (EC) by assessing the levels of thiobarbituric acid reactive substances (TBARS), lipid hydroperoxides (LOOH), cytochrome P450, antioxidants-superoxide dismutase (SOD), catalase (CAT), glutathione peroxides (GPx), reduced glutathione (GSH), vitamins C and E, matrix metalloproteinases (MMP-2 and 9) and cell cycle check point protein (cyclin D1) in N-methyl-N'-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine (MNNG) induced carcinogenic rats.
HE4 and MMP2 are both proteins whose serum levels increase in endometrial cancer.
To explore the diagnostic potential of the serum levels of HE4 and MMP2 in patients with endometrial cancer and benign endometrial diseases.
To assess the relationship between the serum levels of HE4 and MMP2 and the typical prognostic factors in patients with endometrial cancer.
We observed statistically significant differences in mean serum levels of HE4 and MMP2 between the group of endometrial cancer patients and the group of patients with no changes in the endometrium (P=0.002/0.003).
HE4 and MMP2 are characterized by high specificity and may be useful as biomarkers in the diagnostics of endometrial cancer.
Although OX40 has been reported to be a target gene of human T-cell leukemia virus type-1 (HTLV-1) viral transactivator Tax and is overexpressed in vivo in adult T-cell leukemia (ATL) cells, an association between OX40 and HTLV-1-associated inflammatory disorders, such as HTLV-1-associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis (HAM/TSP), has not yet been established.
Recent studies indicate that OX40/OX40L system mediates the adhesion and infiltration of adult T cell leukemia (ATL).
We reported previously that OX40, a member of the tumor necrosis factor receptor family, is expressed constitutively on fresh leukemia/lymphoma cells isolated from patients with adult T-cell leukemia (ATL).
Similar findings were obtained in OX40(+)- human T-cell leukemia virus type I-transformed T-cell lines.
We demonstrated previously that OX40 and its ligand, gp34, directly mediate adhesion of activated normal CD4+ T cells, as well as human T-cell leukemia virus type I (HTLV-I)-transformed T cells to vascular endothelial cells.
In the present study, we examined expression of OX40 on fresh leukemic cells from patients with adult T-cell leukemia (ATL) and its possible involvement in cell adhesion.
In this study, we used polychromatic flow cytometry to characterize CD8(+) T-cell subsets specific for EBV-derived lytic (BMFL1 and BRLF1) and latent (LMP1, LMP2, and EBNA3C) antigens in individuals with divergent malaria exposure.
The distribution of gene variants of the antigen processing proteins transporter associated with antigen processing type 1 (TAP1) and proteasome subunit beta type 9 (PSMB9) and of their shared bidirectional promoter was assessed in children with either mild or severe malaria.
GSEA and IPA associated Nur77 to osteoarthritis, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, rheumatoid arthritis, psoriasis, and allergic airway inflammatory diseases.
Accordingly, Nr4a1 mediated the anti-inflammatory properties of ACs in vivo and was required for maintenance of self-tolerance in the murine model of pristane-induced lupus.
This study investigated roles of serum ST2, IL-33 and BNP in predicting major adverse cardiovascular events (MACEs) in acute myocardial infarction (AMI) after percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI).
Recombinant human B-type natriuretic peptide (rhBNP) has been shown to be efficacious in the treatment of acute decompensated heart failure and acute myocardial infarction.
#目#的#：#分#析#急#诊#经#皮#冠#状#动#脉#介#入(percutaneous coronary intervention, PCI)#治#疗#急#性#心#肌#梗#死(acute myocardial infarction, AMI)#患#者#的#病#例#资#料, #旨#在#探#讨#影#响#急#诊PCI#治#疗AMI#患#者#住#院#期#间#不#良#预#后#的#相#关#因#素#。#方#法#：#回#顾#性#分#析2010#年1#月#至2014#年12#月#中#南#大#学#湘#雅#二#医#院#行#急#诊PCI#治#疗AMI#的#患#者#资#料, #根#据#是#否#发#生#心#血#管#不#良#事#件#分#为#事#件#组#及#非#事#件#组, #比#较#两#组#间#可#能#引#起#心#血#管#不#良#事#件#发#生#的#相#关#因#素#。#结#果#：#不#良#事#件#的#发#生#率#为22%(67/304)#；#通#过t#检#验#或X2#检#验#发#现#：#肌#酐, #脑#钠#肽(brain natriuretic peptide, BNP), #红#细#胞#比#容, #白#细#胞#、#年#龄&gt;75#岁, Killip#分#级&gt;=2#级, #术#后#心#肌#梗#死#溶 #治#疗(thrombolysis in myocardial infarction, TIMI)#血#流&lt;=2#级, #术#前#发#生#心#律#失#常#、#多#支#病#变, #术#后2 h ST#段#回#落#率&lt;50%, #长#就#诊#至#球#囊#扩#张(door-to-balloon, D2B)#时#间#差#异#具#有#统#计#学#意#义(P&lt;0.05), #进#一#步#进#行logistic#回#归#分#析, #其#结#果#显#示#：#红#细#胞#比#容(red blood cell specific volume, HCT)#、N #端#脑#钠#肽#激#素#原#前#体(N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide, NT-proBNP)#、Killip#分#级&gt;=2#级#、#术#后TIMI#血#流&lt;=2#级#、#术#后2 h ST#段#回#落#率&lt;50%#、#长D2B#时#间#是#心#血#管#不#良#事#件#发#生#的#重#要#影#响#因#素#。#结#论#：HCT, NT-proBNP, Killip#分#级&gt;=2#级, #术#后TIMI#血#流&lt;=2#级, #术#后2 h ST#段#回#落 #率&lt;50%#、#长D2B#时#间#是#心#血#管#不#良#事#件#发#生#的#重#要#影#响#因#素, #对#上#述#高#危#患#者#进#行#积#极#的#监#测#与#处#理, #能#够#有#效#改#善AMI#患#者#急#诊PCI#术#后#的#预#后, #减#少#住#院#期#间#不#良#事#件#的#发#生#。.
The levels of NT-proBNP in the acute myocardial infarction (AMI) group were higher compared with unstable angina pectoris (UAP), stable angina pectoris (SAP), and control groups, and the levels of NT-proBNP in UAP were higher compared to the SAP and control groups.
After cisplatin and bleomycin-containing chemotherapy (CTx) for testicular cancer, part of the patients may develop acute or long-term cardiovascular toxicity.
The risk of causing factors of thromboembolism in patients with testicular cancer under cisplatin and bleomycin-containing CTx should be evaluated.
Hypoparathyroidism, sensorineural hearing loss, and renal disease (HDR) syndrome, also known as Barakat syndrome, is a rare genetic disorder with high phenotypic heterogeneity caused by haploinsufficiency of the GATA3 gene on chromosome 10p14-p15.
Hypoparathyroidism, sensorineural deafness, and renal dysplasia (HDR) syndrome is a rare autosomal dominant disease caused by GATA3 mutations.
We concluded that: (1) CD13 and GATA-3 immunostains may serve as a diagnostic aid in differentiating subtypes of RCC; (2) CD13 is always absent in chromophobe RCC and oncocytomas, whereas CD10 can be immunoexpressed in both; (3) CD13 should be included in a panel of antibodies to distinguish "proximal renal tumors" from "distal renal tumors" and between clear cell RCC versus microphthalmia transcription factor family translocations RCCs; and (4) when present, GATA-3 is specific for clear cell papillary RCC.
Genome-wide significant signals were detected for three of the four transitions: (1) for smoking cessation on 10p14 (P = 4.47e-08 for rs72779075 flanked by RP11-575N15 and GATA3), (2) for tolerance on 11p13 (P = 1.29e-08 for rs11031684 in RP1-65P5.1), mediated by smoking quantity, and on 9q34.12 (P = 3.81e-08 for rs2304808 in FUBP3), independent of smoking quantity, and (3) for smoking initiation on 19q13.33 (P = 3.37e-08 for rs73050610 flanked by TRPM4 and SLC6A16) in analysis adjusted for first time sensations.
Nevertheless, the PRLR neutralizing antibody LFA102 tested recently in a Phase I trial in advanced, PRLR-positive prostate cancer and breast cancer patients failed to provide any clinical benefit.
In contrast, PRLR/STAT5 signaling was recently proposed to prevent breast cancer cell dissemination and to predict favorable clinical outcomes.
Our studies have demonstrated the essential role of endogenous PRL and CDK7 in the upregulation of PRLR by E2 and provide insights for therapeutic approaches that will mitigate the transcription/expression of PRLR and its participation in breast cancer progression fueled by E2 and PRL via their cognate receptors.
The Prolactin Receptor (PRLR) is a type 1 cytokine receptor that is expressed in a subset of breast cancers and may contribute to its pathogenesis.
We developed an anti-PRLR antibody-drug conjugate (ADC), to target PRLR-positive breast cancer.
These results illustrate promising antitumor activity against PRLR-positive breast cancer xenografts and support the evaluation of anti-PRLR ADCs as potential therapeutic agents in breast cancer.
In this study, we compared the trafficking of HER2, which is the target of the clinically approved ADC ado-trastuzumab emtansine (T-DM1), with that of prolactin receptor (PRLR), another potential target in breast cancer.
Furthermore, in breast cancer cells that coexpress HER2 and PRLR, a HER2xPRLR bispecific ADC kills more effectively than HER2 ADC.
In conclusion, truncating mutations of PRLR promote tumor growth in a model of human ERAlfa+ breast cancer and warrant further investigation.
As all antipsychotics (although differences with respect to PRL elevation are large) have the propensity to induce hyperprolactinemia (HPRL), questions have arisen concerning the influence of PRL-elevating antipsychotic medications on breast cancer risk.
A literature search (until January 2016), using the MEDLINE database, was conducted for English-language published clinical studies to identify and synthesize data of the current state of knowledge concerning the relationship between HPRL, breast cancer risk (factors) and antipsychotic medication.
Vaccination with DNA encoding for Gad65, secretogranin 5, pancreas/duodenum homeobox protein 1 (Pdx1), carboxyl ester lipase, glucagon and control hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) induced diabetes in &lt;20% of mice.
ProSAAS and 7B2 may perform a chaperone role as secretory anti-aggregants in normal islet cell function and in type 2 diabetes.
In the brains of APP/PSEN1 mice, a model of AD amyloidosis, immunoreactive 7B2 co-localized with aggregation-prone proteins and their respective aggregates.
Apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1 (ASK1) activates the proapoptotic c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase 1/2 (JNK1/2) leading to apoptosis, suggesting a possible role of ASK1 in diabetes-induced heart defects.
We aimed to investigate whether ASK1 is activated in the heart and whether deleting the Ask1 gene blocks diabetes-induced adverse events and heart defect formation.
Deleting Ask1 gene significantly reduced the rate of heart defects, including ventricular septal defects (VSDs) and persistent truncus arteriosus (PTA).
The CC16 serum level is elevated in patients with pulmonary fibrosis, but its predictive value on lung disease progression has not yet been studied.
We aimed to assess the value of serum CC16 concentration in predicting lung disease deterioration in patients with systemic sclerosis (SSc).
Progression of lung disease evaluated by a mean time-to-event differed between patients with high baseline serum CC16 (42.8 mos, 36.3-49.3) and those with low serum CC16 (56.3 mos, 50.9-61.7; log-rank test, p &lt; 0.001).
High baseline serum CC16 predicts lung disease worsening in patients with SSc.
We evaluated CC-16 as a candidate biomarker for respiratory failure in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
We propose that increased CC-16 levels is a marker of lung inflammatory response that associated with ventilatory insufficiency are related to impending respiratory failure, not fully predicted by conventional respiratory tests.
The aim of this pilot study was to determine Clara cell protein (CC16) concentration in bronchoalveolar lavages (BAL) fluid from full-term and preterm (&lt;37 weeks' gestational age) neonates requiring respiratory support, having symptoms of neonatal respiratory distress syndrome, and at risk of bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD).
With regard to ARDS, initial levels of cytokeratin fragment 21-1, the soluble fragment of cytokeratin 19 (CYFRA21-1) and of the club cell protein 16 (CC16) provided significant results in each statistical analysis.
With regard to pneumonia, each statistical analysis supplied significant results for both initial and day-2 levels of CYFRA21-1 and CC16.
Consistently, initial CYFRA21-1 levels were identified as the most promising predictor of ARDS, whereas day-2 CC16 levels have to be considered as most appropriate for predicting pneumonia.
However, CC16 levels exceeding 30.51 ng/ml on day 2 may allow a firmer diagnosis for the development of pneumonia.
In 8- to 24-month-old children with previously manifested pneumonia, serum CC16 was lower in atopic (2.9 ng/mL) in relation to nonatopic children (3.7 ng/mL), P=.029 (serum CC16 &lt;=3.4 ng/mL indicating atopy in the group of children with pneumonia, sensitivity 100%, and specificity 77%).
Atopic 8- to 24-month-old children with previously manifested pneumonia had lower CC16 in relation to other atopic children in this age (P=.021) (for cutoff CC16&lt;=3.4 ng/mL sensitivity 100%, specificity 77%), and also often chronic wheezing (atopic with pneumonia 83.3%, n=5/6 vs atopic without pneumonia 21.4%, n=3/14), P=.018.
Low serum CC16 is associated with previously expressed pneumonia and chronic wheezing in atopic children.
Also, we explored the usefulness of serum levels of CC16 for the differential diagnosis of IPF (n = 85), compared with non-IPF interstitial lung diseases [chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis (cHP; n = 85) and connective tissue diseases (CTD-ILD; n = 85)].
TBX22 encodes a T-box containing transcription factor and mutations in this gene are responsible for X-linked cleft palate and ankyloglossia.
Moreover, EMSA and ChIP assays demonstrated that the allele A disrupts the binding site of ETS-1, thus markedly decreases the activity of the TBX22 promoter, which is likely to lead to the birth defect of the CPO without ankyloglossia.
Four mutations in TBX22 exon 5 in X-linked cleft palate with ankyloglossia (CPX) patients had been identified in the previous studies.
X-linked cleft palate (CPX) is caused by mutations in the gene encoding the TBX22 transcription factor and is known to exhibit phenotypic variability, usually involving either a complete, partial or submucous cleft palate, with or without ankyloglossia.
To resolve if TBX22 mutations cause isolated tongue-tie in the Finnish population.
Mutation analysis of the coding region of the TBX22 gene in 50 Finnish isolated tongue-tie patients and 61 control samples.
Mutations in the coding region of the TBX22 gene are not a major cause of ankyloglossia in the Finnish population and do not explain the sex difference or inheritance of tongue-tie.
Mutations in TBX22 are known causes of cleft palate with/without ankyloglossia.
Our study has demonstrated that TBX22 mutation is associated not only with cleft palate and ankyloglossia, but also cleft lip and palate and tooth agenesis.
X-linked cleft palate and ankyloglossia (CPX) are caused by mutations in the TBX22 transcription factor.
To investigate whether patients with ankyloglossia alone or in the presence of other craniofacial features including hypodontia or CLP might be caused by TBX22 mutations, we analyzed 45 Thai patients with isolated ankyloglossia, 2 unusual CPA families, and 282 non-syndromic Thai and UK patients with CLP.
Mutations in the gene encoding the T-box transcription factor TBX22 cause X-linked cleft palate and ankyloglossia in humans.
It frequently accompanies X-linked cleft palate and is sometimes seen alone due to mutations in the gene encoding the transcription factor TBX22, while knockout of Lgr5 in the mouse results in ankyloglossia.
Mutations in Tbx22 have been reported in families with X-linked cleft palate and ankyloglossia, but the underlying pathogenetic mechanism remains unknown.
Because overexpression of COX-2 has been demonstrated to be a master regulator in endometriosis progression, our data demonstrate the critical function of proinflammatory cytokines and the COUP-TFII regulatory gene network in the progression of endometriosis.
We observed that, as in mice, COUP-TFII is robustly expressed in the endometrial stroma of healthy women, and its expression is reduced in the ectopic lesions of women with endometriosis.
The determination that COUP-TFII plays a role in inflammation may add insight into the role of COUP-TFII in embryo implantation and in endometrial diseases such as endometriosis.
In addition, the results of the RD3 and ET3 immunostains clearly explain for the first time the presence of both 3R and 4R tau isoforms in preparations of insoluble tau from some Pick's disease cases.
Beginning at the age of 6 months, Myc(His) transgenic mice developed B-cell and plasma neoplasms, such as IgM(+) lymphoblastic B-cell lymphomas, Bcl-6(+) diffuse large B-cell lymphomas, and CD138(+) plasmacytomas, with an overall incidence of 68% by 21 months.
The purpose of this study was to examine the role of cytokines in the pathogenesis of infantile spasm by investigating cytokine levels before and 1month after adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) therapy in patients diagnosed with the condition.
Treatment of infantile spasms has little class I data, but adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), prednisolone and vigabatrin have the best evidence as first-line medications.
Newly diagnosed infants with West syndrome were randomized to receive 14 days of oral prednisolone (40-60 mg/day) or a synthetically prepared intramuscular long-acting adrenocorticotropic hormone (40-60 IU/every other day [0.5-0.75 mg]) according to the United Kingdom Infantile Spasm Study protocol.
By day 14, cessation of infantile spasms occurred in 28/48 (58.3%) infants on prednisolone compared with only 18/49 (36.7%) infants given adrenocorticotropic hormone (P = 0.03) and electroclinical remission in 21 on prednisolone compared with nine on adrenocorticotropic hormone (P = 0.007).
The third patient had electrographic remission with previous adrenocorticotropic hormone treatment but infantile spasm remission only after receiving topiramate.
Heart rate variability analysis found lower heart rate variability parameters in patients with infantile spasm at the onset of the syndrome, prior to treatment with ACTH.
Our data suggest that patients with infantile spasm exhibit lower heart rate variability parameters, and the treatment of spasms with ACTH and B6 together diminished the autonomic dysfunction in our cohort.
We describe an 8-month-old infant with infantile spasms treated with adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) who presented with fatal Legionella pneumophila and Pneumocystis jirovecii infection.
In the present study, the contribution of 5-HTT polymorphisms to the risk of infantile spasm (IS) and the responsiveness to adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) were investigated.
Thus, our results show (1) that NPM-ALK and TPM3-ALK oncogenes are sufficient for lymphoma/leukemia development and required for tumor maintenance, hence validating ALK as potentially effective therapeutic target; and (2) for the first time, in vivo, the equal tumorigenic potential of the NPM-ALK and TPM3-ALK oncogenic tyrosine kinases.
In anaplastic large-cell lymphomas positive for anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) protein, the ALK gene is most commonly fused to the NPM gene, and less commonly to TPM3, TFG, ATIC, and other rare genes.
They are made of cadherin-23 and protocadherin-15, products of the Usher syndrome type 1 genes USH1D and USH1F, respectively.
To date, five USH1 genes have been identified: MYO7A (USH1B), CDH23 (USH1D), PCDH15 (USH1F), USH1C(USH1C), and USH1G(USH1G).
There are five known USH1 molecules: the molecular motor myosin VIIa (USH1B); the two cell-cell adhesion cadherin proteins, cadherin 23 (USH1D) and protocadherin 15, (USH1F) and the scaffold proteins, harmonin (USH1C) and SANS (USH1G).
We found that PAK5 was highly expressed in the tumor tissues of glioma patients and human glioma cell lines.
We then used a lentivirus-delivered short hairpin RNA to stably silence PAK5 expression in glioma cells and explore its influence.
The results showed that the inhibition of PAK5 reduced cell viability and delayed the cell cycle at the G0/G1 phase in the glioma cells with PAK5 high expression.
In conclusion, our results suggest that the inhibition of PAK5 by RNA interference might efficiently suppress tumor development of glioma cells with PAK5 high expression.
Little is known regarding the mechanisms underlying the downstream targets of PAK5, and information concerning its biological significance in glioma is lacking.
In this study, we investigated the effects of PAK5 on proliferation, migration, invasion, and apoptosis in human U87 and U251 glioma cells and examined the underlying molecular mechanism.
We demonstrated that suppression of PAK5 in glioma cells significantly inhibited cell migration and invasion.
We also observed that suppression of PAK5 in human glioma cell lines inhibited cell growth because of G1 phase arrest.
This syndrome is characterized by the presence of multiple osteochondromas in limbs, hypertrichosis, and facial phenotype that includes sparse scalp hair, large laterally protruding ears, a long nose with a bulbous tip.
Two ongoing phase II clinical trials (RENEW and SYNERGY) have been developed to test the efficacy of anti-LINGO-1 antibodies in acute optic neuritis and relapsing forms of multiple sclerosis, respectively.
Understanding the regulation of myelination by oligodendrocytes is therefore critical for developing therapies for the treatment of MS. We previously demonstrated that leucine-rich repeat and Ig-like domain-containing Nogo receptor interacting protein 1 (LINGO-1) is a negative regulator of oligodendrocyte differentiation and that anti-LINGO-1 promotes remyelination in preclinical animal models for MS and in a phase II acute optic neuritis clinical trial (RENEW).
An antibody against a Nogo receptor subunit, leucine rich repeat and immunoglobulin-like domain-containing protein 1 (LINGO-1), was recently shown to improve outcome in patients with acute optic neuritis in a phase II study.
Optic neuritis has been used in a series of recent pilot studies investigating the effects of erythropoietin, simvastatin, autologous mesenchymal stem cells, phenytoin, as well as blockade of LINGO-1 (opicinumab).
In animal models, LINGO-1 expression is upregulated in rat spinal cord injury, experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, 6-hydroxydopamine neurotoxic lesions and glaucoma models.
The antagonism of LINGO-1, a CNS-specific negative regulator of neuronal survival, was shown to promote short-term survival of retinal ganglion cell (RGC) in an ocular hypertension model.
To determine the relationship between LINGO-1 and BDNF/TrkB receptor in neuronal protection, we show here that LINGO-1 forms a receptor complex with TrkB and negatively regulates its activation in the retina after ocular hypertension injury.
LINGO-1 antagonism therefore promotes RGC survival by regulating the BDNF and TrkB signaling pathway after ocular hypertension.
Fibulin-1 is an extracellular matrix (ECM) protein, levels of which are elevated in serum and lung tissue from patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis compared to healthy volunteers.
Emerging evidence suggests that alpha-processing single transmembrane proteins, amyloid precursor protein (APP) and anti-aging protein Klotho, are likely to be involved in the progression of Alzheimer's disease (AD).
Amyloid-Beta (ABeta) peptides occur in the brains of patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD), but their role in functional impairment is still debated.
Regulation of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) processing by Alfa- and Beta-secretases is of special interest to Alzheimer's disease (AD), as these proteases prevent or mediate amyloid beta formation, respectively.
By perusing publicly available data sets, four potential peptides of interest seem common to stress induction and/or are highly conserved; potential peptides from the MMP24-AS1, ZFAS1, RP11-622K12.1, and MIR22HG genes.
Here, we report focussed and comprehensive investigations of MYCC, MYCN and MYCL in an extensive medulloblastoma cohort (n = 292), aimed to define more precisely their biological significance and optimal clinical application to direct improved disease risk-stratification and individualisation of therapy.
Amplifications in this series included MYCL, MYCN and MYC previously implicated in medulloblastoma pathogenesis, as well as novel amplicons on chromosomes 2, 4, 11 and 12.
Usher syndrome type III (USH3), characterized by progressive deafness, variable balance disorder and blindness, is caused by destabilizing mutations in the gene encoding the clarin-1 (CLRN1) protein.
Usher syndrome type III (USH3A) is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by mutations in clarin-1 (CLRN1) gene, leading to progressive retinal degeneration and sensorineural deafness.
Mutations in CDH23, PCDH15, VLGR1 and clarin-1 cause Usher syndrome, characterized by congenital deafness, vestibular dysfunction and retinitis pigmentosa.
To describe the mutations in the CLRN1 gene in patients from 2 consanguineous Pakistani families diagnosed with autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa (arRP).
Mutations in the CLRN1 gene cause Usher syndrome type 3 (USH3), a human disease characterized by progressive blindness and deafness.
Clrn1 KO mice do not develop a retinal degeneration phenotype, but exhibit progressive loss of sensory hair cells in the cochlea and deterioration of the organ of Corti by 4 months.
If CLRN1 expression in humans is comparable to the expression pattern observed in mice, this is the first report of an inner retinal protein that, when mutated, causes retinal degeneration.
To compare ultrasound-derived resistive indices (RIs) obtained at the level of the thalamus via fast Doppler ultrasound with traditional anterior cerebral artery measures in a model of neonatal hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy and to correlate each with clinical outcomes.
However, in the cases developing PMDs, the PIs were 1.09+/-0.17, 0.95+/-0.21 and 0.78+/-0.07 and RIs 0.66+/-0.07, 0.60+/-0.07 and 0.54+/-0.04, respectively (P&lt;0.05).
Tonsillectomy, traditionally performed using reusable instruments (RIs), has recently been performed using disposable instruments (DIs), to prevent the theoretical risk of spreading new variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease.
Ictal and interictal RIs were similar in 9 patients suffering from migraine without aura.
During nitroglycerin-induced headache, the RIs were no different from those recorded during migraine attacks and in non-nitroglycerin-provoked healthy controls (p &gt; 0.05, ANOVA and multiple range test).
Two independent epigenome-wide association studies of Alzheimer's disease cohorts have identified overlapping methylation signals in four loci, ANK1, RPL13, RHBDF2 and CDH23, not previously associated with Alzheimer's disease.
In multivariate logistic regression model adjusting for age, gender, diabetes, systolic blood pressure and left ventricle mass index, epicardial fat thickness from LAX (and not from SAX) was the only independent predictor of e' [e' sep &lt; 8: OR = 1.8, 95%CI = 1.1-2.9; e' lat&lt;10: OR = 1.6, 95%CI = 1.01-2.6].
This might reflect insufficient titration effort or lax adherence, but these issues could in some cases result from concerns about hypoglycaemia.
These obstacles begin with defining obesity and include lax application of scientific standards of review, tenuous assumption making, flawed measurement and other methods, constrained discourse limiting examination of alternative explanations of cause, and policies that determine funding priorities.
In this study, we investigated the influence of GRIM19 in a DSS induced colitis mouse model.
We hypothesized that Grim19 would ameliorate DSS induced colitis by altering STAT3 activity and intestinal inflammation.
Grim19 ameliorated DSS induced colitis severity and protected intestinal tissue.
Moreover, DSS induced colitis progression in a Grim19 transgenic mouse line was inhibited in association with a reduction in STAT3 and IL-17 expression.
These results suggest that Grim19 attenuates DSS induced colitis by suppressing the excessive inflammatory response mediated by STAT3 activation.
We found high levels of PSMA, TERT, and PDEF protein by Western blot and immunofluorescence in the malignant tumor of the prostate.
We also detected upregulation of PSMA, TERT, and PDEF mRNA in the malignant tumor of the prostate, suggesting complex regulation of these three genes in prostate cancer.
Variance analysis showed statistically significant differences comparing the expression of PSMA, TERT, and PDEF in the malignant tumor of the prostate and normal tissues.
The high expression of PSMA, TERT, and PDEF in the malignant tumor of the prostate suggests the important roles of these three factors in the occurrence and development of the malignant tumors of the prostate.
PSMA, TERT, and PDEF may serve as a reference for clinical diagnosis and as potential targets for the malignant tumor of the prostate therapeutics.
In prostate cancer cell lines, AR signaling stimulated the activity of the transcription factor SPDEF, which repressed the expression of TGFBI ADT, AR antagonism, or overexpression of TGFBI inhibited the activity of SPDEF and enhanced the proliferation rates of prostate cancer cells.
These interesting attributes coupled with its aberrant expression in cancer have rendered PDEF a focus of increasing interest by tumor biologists.
This review provides a current understanding of the characteristics of PDEF expression and its role in breast cancer.
The bulk of the evidence is consistent with PDEF overexpression in most breast tumors and an oncogenic role for this transcription factor in breast cancer.
In addition, high PDEF expression in estrogen receptor-positive breast tumors showed significant correlation with poor overall survival in several independent cohorts of breast cancer patients.
Together, these findings demonstrate PDEF to be an oncogenic driver of breast cancer and a biomarker of poor prognosis in this cancer.
Based on this understanding and the limited expression of PDEF in normal human tissues, the development of PDEF-based therapeutics for prevention and treatment of breast cancer is also discussed.
We investigated these mechanisms and the effects of SPDEF on Beta-catenin activity in mouse models of colorectal cancer (CRC), CRC cell lines, and mouse and human normal and cancer colonoids.
We generated SPDEF-inducible human colonoids, including a line derived from normal rectal mucosa (control) and an adenocarcinoma line derived from a patient with germline MUTYH mutation.
FOXA3 and SPDEF induced MUC5AC and MUC5B, while HNF4A induced MUC3 in human mucinous lung cancer cells harboring a KRAS mutation.
We applied the MINDy (Modulator Inference by Network Dynamics) algorithm to four TFs (ESR1, FOXA1, GATA3 and SPDEF) that are key drivers of estrogen receptor-positive (ER+) breast cancer risk, as well as cancer progression.
Microarray data analysis and immunostaining of patient tissue samples clearly showed decreased expression levels of DGAT1 and integrin Beta1 in patients who have nodular cirrhosis without fatty degeneration.
Expression of integrin Beta1 is regulated by the mechanical stiffness of the ECM, and correlates with the invasion and metastasis events of HCC in patients with cirrhosis.
To investigate the expression of integrin beta 1 in hepatic cirrhosis (HC) and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
Integrin beta 1 may play an important role in the development of hepatic fibrosis, hepatic cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma.
CD29 was strongly expressed on the cell membrane of hepatocytes in 18/20 patients with cirrhosis, in 17/18 with alcoholic hepatitis without cirrhosis, in 5/9 of fatty liver and in all six with hepatitis C. CD45RA was present in 5/18 cases of alcoholic hepatitis and in 3/20 cases of cirrhosis on the hepatocytes plasma membrane, in none of the controls, and rarely on lymphocytes.
This study described the distribution, pattern and intensity of cytokine TGFa, adhesion molecules CD 34 and CD 44 and integrins a2, a3, CD 29 (beta 1 chain) and CD 61 (beta 3 chain) in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), metastatic liver tumors and hepatic cirrhosis.
Peripheral blood lymphocytes from patients with alcoholic cirrhosis, alcohol-induced fatty liver, and healthy controls were analyzed for helper-inducer (CD4+CD29w+) and suppressor-inducer (CD4+CD45R+) T lymphocytes.
Within the CD4+ T-cell population a change in the relative proportion of two complementary lymphocyte subsets (CD4+CD29+ helper-inducer and CD4+CD45R+ suppressor-inducer T cells) was observed in patients with alcoholic cirrhosis: a higher percentage of CD4+CD29w+ helper-inducer T cells were circulating in their peripheral blood than in healthy controls (median, 33% versus 28%; p = 0.0036), whereas the CD4+CD45R+ suppressor-inducer T-cell subset did not differ (median, 21% versus 21%) between the two groups.
These findings show that SCF may play a pivotal role in the recruitment of mast cells in allergic rhinitis.
Patients with XLF mutation exhibit microcephaly, lymphopenia, and growth retardation, and are immunodeficient and radiosensitive.
Here, we investigated the role of XRCC4-like factor (XLF), a core member of the non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) repair pathway, in chemoresistance in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
These results indicate that XLF facilitates DNA end-joining and therefore promotes NHEJ activity in cancer cells.
NHEJ1-patients develop severe progressive lymphocytopenia and premature aging of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) at a young age.
Here we show a patient with a homozygous-NHEJ1 mutation identified by whole exome-sequencing that developed severe pancytopenia and bone marrow aplasia correlating with the presence of short telomeres.
In this study, we have found that XLF is over-expressed in HPV(+) versus HPV(-) head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) and significantly down-regulated in the HNSCC cell lines expressing high level of mutant p53 protein versus those cell lines harboring wild-type TP53 gene with low p53 protein expression.
As a result, the expression of XLF in these cancer cells is significantly suppressed.
Defects in DNA cross-link repair 1C (DCLRE1C), protein kinase DNA activated catalytic polypeptide (PRKDC), ligase 4 (LIG4), NHEJ1, and NBS1 involving the nonhomologous end-joining (NHEJ) DNA repair pathway result in radiation-sensitive severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID).
The FISH result of case 2 was 47,XX,+mar.ish r(10)(p11.2q11.2) (cep10+, RP11-232C13+, RP11-178A10+)[25]/46,XX[10].
Interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis on uncultured amniocytes using a 2q11.1-specific probe RP11-468G5 (spectrum green) showed three green signals in 11 of 47 uncultured amniocytes, indicating 23.4% mosaicism for trisomy 2.
Taken together, our data show that BACE1 plays a critical role in retinal homeostasis and that the use of BACE inhibitors for AD should be viewed with extreme caution as they could lead to retinal pathology and exacerbate conditions such as age-related macular degeneration.
To report a new phenotype with additional data on the oculo-dental syndrome of cone-rod dystrophy (CRD) and amelogenesis imperfecta (AI) caused by mutations on CNNM4, a metal transporter, with linkage at achromatopsia locus 2q11 (Jalili syndrome).
The combination of recessively inherited cone-rod dystrophy (CRD) and amelogenesis imperfecta (AI) was first reported by Jalili and Smith in 1988 in a family subsequently linked to a locus on chromosome 2q11, and it has since been reported in a second small family.
In essential thrombocythemia (ET), JAK2 V617F mutation, splenomegaly, and mutations in SH2B3, SF3B1, U2AF1, TP53, IDH2, and EZH2 were found to be additional negative prognostic factors.
For essential thrombocythemia, reported risk factors for leukemic transformation include advanced age, extreme thrombocytosis, anemia, leukocytosis, and sequence variants/mutations involving TP53 and EZH2 (for expansion of gene symbols, see www.genenames.org); for polycythemia vera, advanced age, leukocytosis, abnormal karyotype, mutations involving SRSF2 and IDH2, and treatment with pipobroman, chlorambucil, or P32; and for PMF, increased blast percentage, thrombocytopenia, abnormal karyotype, triple-negative driver mutational status, and sequence variants/mutations involving SRSF2, RUNX1, CEBPA, and SH2B3.
AAH expression was examined in 50 surgically resected primary ICCs, 12 samples of normal liver, and 12 cases of primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC).
However, what kind of role hepaCAM plays in colorectal cancer (CRC) remains unknown.
Previously, we reported the identification of a novel immunoglobulin-like cell adhesion molecule hepaCAM that is frequently downregulated and inhibits cell growth in hepatocellular carcinoma.
The same protein was recently published under the name hepaCAM and was suggested to be associated with hepatocellular carcinoma.
We investigated the expression of transforming growth factor-Beta1 (TGF-Beta1) and connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) in the liver tissue of infants with congenital biliary atresia and neonatal hepatitis, as well as the relationship between the expression of the two factors and liver fibrosis.
In the neonatal hepatitis patients, CTGF and TGF-Beta1 were mainly expressed in the hepatocytes, while they were expressed in both hepatocytes and biliary epithelial cells in the congenital biliary atresia patients, and in these patients the expression was significantly stronger than in the neonatal hepatitis patients (P &lt; 0.01).
Early expression of CTGF and TGF-Beta1 in biliary epithelial cells may be involved in the pathogenesis of congenital biliary atresia.
Therefore, ESUBFs might be a preferred alternative to cure hyperuricemia and gout.
We have characterized an anti-NOR (nucleolar organizer region) serum (P419) from a patient with rheumatoid arthritis and show that it contains antibodies directed against the RNA polymerase I-specific transcription initiation factor UBF.
The aim of this study was to investigate the expression of multidrug resistance-associated protein 1 (MRP1) and to assess the possible associations with clinicopathological variables and patient outcome in primary ovarian carcinoma.
The aim of the present study was to investigate the prognostic value of drug resistance-associated proteins P-glycoprotein (P-gp), multidrug resistance-associated protein 1 (MRP1), canalicular multispecific organic anion transporter (c-MOAT/MRP2), and lung resistance protein (LRP) in ovarian carcinoma.
Expression of P-gp, MRP1, MRP2, and LRP was determined by immunohistochemistry of frozen tissue sections of 115 ovarian carcinoma patients and related to clinicopathological factors, response to chemotherapy, and progression-free survival.
In conclusion, in ovarian carcinoma, MRP1 expression is associated with MRP2 and P-gp expression, whereas LRP expression is associated with favorable clinicopathological characteristics.
Assessment of P-gp, MRP1, MRP2, or LRP does not allow prediction of response to chemotherapy or survival in ovarian carcinoma.
PTPRN2 is not yet linked to a genetic syndrome, although its expression has been identified in the adult human brain, in certain tumors, and in association with type 1 diabetes mellitus.
IA-2 (also known as islet cell antigen ICA-512) and IA-2 beta (also known as phogrin, phosphatase homologue in granules of insulinoma) are major autoantigens in insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM).
The aim of this work was to assess the maturation of the humoral immune response to the protein tyrosine phosphatase(PTP)-related proteins (IA-2 and IA-2beta) in preclinical type I diabetes (TID).
The RPTP-like proteins IA-2 and IA-2beta, major autoantigens in insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, contain just a single enzymatically inactive PTP-like domain.
Genetic mutations associated with canine glaucoma include those affecting ADAMTS10, ADAMTS17, Myocilin, Nebulin, COL1A2, RAB22A, and SRBD1.
Using exome-sequencing analysis, a possibly damaging, non-synonymous variant in the gene Nebulin (NEB) was found to segregate with PACG which alters a phylogenetically conserved Lysine residue.
99m Tc-MIP-1404 (Progenics Pharmaceuticals, Inc., New York, NY) is a novel, SPECT-compatible 99m Tc-labeled PSMA inhibitor for the detection of prostate cancer.
From April 2013 to April 2017, 99m Tc-MIP1404-scintigraphy was performed in 225 patients for workup of PSA biochemical relapse of prostate cancer.
Mutations in PEX13 and other peroxin proteins are associated with Zellweger syndrome spectrum (ZSS) disorders, a subtype of peroxisome biogenesis disorder characterized by prominent neurological, hepatic, and renal abnormalities leading to neonatal death.
Similar effects were observed for both cultured embryonic fibroblasts and brain neurons from a PEX13-null mouse with a Zellweger-syndrome-like phenotype, and a less-pronounced effect was observed for fibroblasts from an infantile Refsum patient who was homozygous for a milder PEX1 mutation.
The mRNA levels of PGC-1Alfa and ERRGamma in the endometrial carcinoma tissues and hyperplasic endometrial tissues were significantly greater than those in the normal endometria.
The mRNA levels of PGC-1Alfa and ERRGamma in the endometrial carcinoma patients with type 2 diabetes were higher than those in patients without diabetes.
The mRNA levels of PGC-1Alfa and ERRGamma in the endometrial adenocarcinomas increased with clinical staging, depth of myometrial invasion, and increases in the number of metastatic lymph nodes.
The PGC-1Alfa mRNA level was positively correlated with ERRGamma in the endometrial carcinoma tissues.
The mRNA levels of PGC-1Alfa were positively correlated with the concentrations of pyruvate kinase and isocitrate dehydrogenase in the endometrial carcinoma tissues, and similar results were found for ERRGamma.
Our results suggested that the upregulation of PGC-1Alfa and ERRGamma in endometrial cancer might be a requirement for cancer cell energy metabolism, which contributes to the development of endometrial cancer.
The objective of this study was to explore the effects and underlying mechanism of estrogen-related receptor Gamma (ERRGamma) on the proliferation of endometrial carcinoma cells.
Our data showed that ERRGamma mediated the effects of estrogen on the proliferation of endometrial cancer cells through the activation AKT and ERK1/2 signaling pathways, which indicated that ERRGamma plays a key role in endometrial cancer.
We aimed to measure the expression of ERRGamma and determine its association with the ER-mediated pathway in human endometrial cancer.
The association between ERRGamma and ERAlfa expressions was determined by immunohistochemical analysis in uterine endometrial cancer tissues.
The stable overexpression of ERRGamma regulated the in vitro cell growth in the ERAlfa-positive and ERAlfa-negative endometrial cancer cell lines.
A selective ERRGamma agonist, DY131, inhibited the growth of the ERAlfa-positive endometrial cancer cells but promoted that of the ERAlfa-negative cancer cells.
Furthermore, we found that ERRGamma is expressed in the nuclei of human uterine endometrial cancer tissues.
The uterine endometrial cancer tissues with ERRGamma-positive/ERAlfa-negative status may have a significantly poor prognosis.
The relationship between ERRGamma and ERAlfa status could be a predictive marker for the treatment of uterine endometrial cancer, which provides an impetus for the identification of ligands for nuclear orphan receptor ERRGamma.
The expression rate and relative level of ERRalpha mRNA in ERalpha-positive endometrial adenocarcinomas were lower than in normal endometriums (P= 0.049 and P= 0.023), whereas the relative level of ERRgamma mRNA in ERalpha-positive endometrial adenocarcinomas was higher than in normal endometriums (P= 0.014).
Results suggested that ERRalpha and ERRgamma might participate in the tumorigenesis of endometrial adenocarcinoma.
ERRalpha and ERRgamma are promising to be new prognostic factors in endometrial adenocarcinoma.
In ERalpha-positive endometrial carcinoma, the expression level of ERRgamma mRNA (0.93 +/- 0.24) was higher than normal endometrium (0.72 +/- 0.21; P = 0.023).
ERRalpha may serve as a biomarker of poor prognosis and ERRgamma as a favorable biomarker in endometrial carcinoma.
In this study, we determined the expression levels of TRPM7 in pancreatic tissue microarrays and correlated these measurements in pancreatic adenocarcinoma with the clinicopathological features.
In the majority of pancreatic adenocarcinoma specimens examined, TRPM7 is expressed at either moderate-level or high-level.
Anti-TRPM7 immunoreactivity in pancreatic adenocarcinoma significantly correlates with the size and stages of tumors.
In human pancreatic adenocarcinoma cells in which TRPM7 is highly expressed, short hairpin RNA-mediated suppression of TRPM7 impairs cell invasion.
TRPM7 is generally overexpressed in human pancreatic adenocarcinoma.
To assess the changes in phosphodiester (PDE)-levels, detected by 31P magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS), over 24-months to determine the potential of PDE as marker for muscle tissue changes in Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy (DMD) patients.
The stable two-fold increase in PDE-levels found in DMD patients in muscles with different levels of muscle wasting over 2-year time, including DMD patients as young as 5.5 years-old, suggests that PDE-levels may increase very rapidly early in the disease process and remain elevated thereafter.
The identification of compounds, especially PDE inhibitors, that moderate the muscle phenotype in these dystrophin-null zebrafish validates the screening protocol described here and may lead to candidate molecules to be used as therapeutic interventions in human muscular dystrophy.
Total PDE activity was found to be elevated in tissue extracts from a mouse model of Duchenne's muscular dystrophy.
Compared with the controls, there were increases in the levels of PDE (+22%, P = 0.032) and Pi (+19%, P = 0.019) in the spectra of fibromyalgia patients, but there was no difference in pH.
We examined potential association of the single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of the HA synthesizing gene - hyaluronan synthase 2 (HAS2), hyaluronan binding protein 1 (HABP1) and HA catabolic gene hyaluronidase 3 (HYAL3) in the primary open angle glaucoma (POAG) patients in the Indian population.
Thirteen tagged SNPs (6 for HAS2, 3 for HABP1 and 4 for HYAL3) were genotyped in 116 high tension (HTG), 321 non-high tension glaucoma (NHTG) samples and 96 unrelated, age-matched, glaucoma-negative, control samples.
We demonstrate its use in identifying ARTN as a strong candidate gene within the 1p34.1-p32 mapped locus for a hereditary form of ptosis.
It occurs in a number of forms including congenital bilateral isolated ptosis, which may be familial and for which two linkage groups are known on chromosomes 1p32-34.1 and Xq24-27.1.
T cells expressing a CAR incorporating the single-chain variable fragment sequence of the ALK48 mAb linked to a 4-1BB-CD3Zeta signaling domain lysed ALK-expressing tumor lines and produced interferon-gamma upon antigen stimulation but had limited anti-tumor efficacy in two xenograft models of human neuroblastoma.
T cells engineered to express a third-generation GD2-CAR incorporating the 14g2a-scFv with the CD28, OX40, and CD3Zeta signaling domains (14g2a.CD28.OX40.Zeta) mediated efficient and comparable lysis of both GD2+ sarcoma and neuroblastoma cell lines in vitro However, in xenograft models, GD2-CAR T cells had no antitumor effect against GD2+ sarcoma, despite effectively controlling GD2+ neuroblastoma.
Many studies have reported a significant association of CDKN2B-AS, also known as ANRIL which is located within the p15, p16, p14 gene cluster at 9p21 locus, with cardiovascular diseases as well as many other diseases like diabetes and cancers.
We report a patient case with uncontrolled porphyria cutanea tarda treated with chemoradiation for p16-positive oropharyngeal cancer.
Antisense noncoding RNA in the INK4 locus (ANRIL), which was coded on the Chr9p21.3 loci, participates in the pathogenesis of tumor, coronary artery disease, type 2 diabetes mellitus, and other diseases.
ADNP de novo mutations in humans result in a syndromic form of autism-like spectrum disorder (ASD), including cognitive and motor deficits, the ADNP syndrome (Helsmoortel-Van Der Aa).
One of the most important cellular processes associated with ADNP is the autophagy pathway, recently discovered by us as a key player in the pathophysiology of schizophrenia.
Thus, linking autophagy and ADNP is proposed as a major target for intervention in brain diseases from autism to Alzheimer's disease (AD) and our findings introduce autophagy as a possible novel target for treating schizophrenia.
Activity-dependent neuroprotective protein (ADNP) is one of the most prevalent de novo mutated genes in syndromic autism spectrum disorders, driving a general interest in the gene and the syndrome.
Heterozygous truncating mutations in ADNP are associated with a syndromic form of intellectual disability known as Helsmoortel-van der Aa syndrome.
From a clinical standpoint, a differential diagnosis of patients with blepharophimosis should include ADNP mutations in addition to blepharophimosis ptosis epicanthus inversus syndrome, especially when intellectual disability is present.
Joint modeling examined relationships among BMI, IIS, and ADNP in the overall sample and stratified by initial visit Clinical Dementia Rating score.
Activity-dependent neuroprotective protein (ADNP), vital for brain formation and cognitive function, is mutated in autism and linked to neurodegenerative/psychiatric diseases.
We estimated rates of clinical progression and tested whether associations between clinical progression and Alzheimer's disease neuropathology (ADNP) were modified by co-occurring Lewy body disease (LBD) or vascular brain injury (VBI).
ADNP key functions extend from mice to men, with mutations causing ADNP-related ID/autism syndrome, also known as the Helsmoortel-Van der Aa syndrome.
ADNP mRNA increases in lymphocytes derived from schizophrenia patients and in patients suffering from mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and further increases in Alzheimer's disease patients compared with controls.
NAP (davunetide), an ADNP snippet drug candidate, protects cognition in patients suffering from amnestic MCI preceding Alzheimer's disease and significantly enhances functional daily activities in schizophrenia patients toward future development.
It is important to note that ADNP is sexually regulated in the brains of birds, mice, and men and in lymphocytes of patients suffering from schizophrenia.
Activity-dependent neuroprotective protein (ADNP), essential for brain formation, is a frequent autism spectrum disorder (ASD)-mutated gene.
Women with (1) FMS + irritable bowel syndrome (IBS); (2) FMS + primary dysmenorrhea (Dys); (3) FMS + Dys secondary to endometriosis (Endo); (4) FMS + colon diverticulosis (Div) were compared with FMS-only women, for fibromyalgia pain (number and intensity of episodes and analgesic consumption) over comparable periods and for somatic hyperalgesia (electrical and pressure pain thresholds) in painful (tender points) and control areas (trapezius, deltoid, quadriceps muscles, and overlying subcutis and skin).
Fibromyalgia syndrome pain and hyperalgesia in all tissues and all sites significantly decreased in patients after visceral comorbidity treatment (dietary for 6 months [IBS], hormonal for 6 months [dysmenorrhea], laser [endometriosis], and surgery [diverticulosis]) (0.05 &lt; P &lt; 0.0001) vs no change in untreated patients.
Thrombotic and inflammatory agents, released from platelets, may trigger disease-specific complications (e.g., extraarticular features, fibrosis in systemic sclerosis) and propagate endothelial dysfunction.
This was tested by genotyping 73 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) from six candidate genes (DUSP1, HRB, IKBKAP, MAP3K1, MAP3K14 and TANK) in a large UK cohort of rheumatoid arthritis patients (n=642).
Moreover, TLR3 negatively manipulated the inflammation-related long noncoding RNA lnc-IL7R, which was upregulated during this chemotherapy.
Upon in vitro TLR3 activation, a decreased frequency of CD8(+) T cells secreting IFN-Gamma, IL-17a or IL-22 was detected in the CVID group compared to the control group.
Importantly, reduced TLR3-triggered activation of human NK cells was observed in Btk-deficient patients with X-linked agammaglobulinemia, as evidenced by the reduced IFN-Gamma, CD69, and CD107a expression and cytotoxic activity.
These TLR defects are restricted because CVID PBMCs stimulated with TLR ligands produced normal amounts of TNF-alpha, IL-6, and IL-12; TLR3-mediated expression of IFN-beta by CVID fibroblasts was normal.
Multivariate analysis showed pretransplant valvular heart disease (P=0.0372), posttransplant enlarged left atrium (P=0.0066), posttransplant mitral regurgitation (P=0.0370), and non-total orthotopic HTX (P=0.0112) as risk factors for AF.
When added to a prognostic baseline model including male sex, heart failure duration, New York Heart Association functional classes III to IV, LVEF, significant mitral regurgitation, and beta-blockers, LVRR, New York Heart Association functional classes III to IV, and significant mitral regurgitation after 24 months emerged as independent predictors of death/HTx and heart failure death/HTx.
In conclusion, tricuspid regurgitation has a higher prevalence than mitral regurgitation and occurs in most patients immediately after HTX; mitral regurgitation was less frequent than tricuspid regurgitation and was not correlated to the hemodynamic parameters or to the distortion of atrial geometry; tricuspid regurgitation was significantly correlated to the ratio of recipient/donor right atrium; surgical techniques reducing the recipient atrium may decrease the occurrence and the degree of tricuspid regurgitation.
EA stimulation of both LI 18 and LI 4-PC 6 and TAES of LI 4-PC 6 combined with anesthetics have a better effect in inducing analgesia and controlling MAP and HR, and need lower dosages of anesthetics for patients undergoing thyroidectomy, for which LI 18 and LI 4-PC 6 are evidently superior to GB 34 and non-acupoint.
anesthesia induction, electroacupuncture (EA) was applied to Hegu (LI 4), Neiguan (PC 6) , Houxi (SI 3) and Zhigou (TE 6) for 30 min; during surgery, EA and intravenous medication were combined at the same acupoints as those before surgery; after surgery, moxibustion and the analgesia pump were applied in combination for analgesia.
In this study, we investigated mRNA expression of TLR-1,-2,-4 and cytokines/receptors (IL-2,-2R,-10,-10R, TGFb1) in pseudosynovial tissue obtained from 55 patients with aseptically failed THAs/TKAs and 37 control patients with hip/knee primary osteoarthritis (OA) using quantitative RT-PCR.
We studied TLR1, TLR2, TLR4, and TLR9 mRNA (qRT-PCR) and receptor proteins (by immunostaining) in primary mature healthy chondrocytes, developing chondrocytes, and degenerated chondrocytes in osteoarthritis (OA) tissue sections of different OARSI grades.
IMD-4482 inhibited in vitro cell adhesion to vitronectin in PAI-1-positive ovarian cancer cells, followed by the inhibition of extracellular signal-regulated kinase and focal adhesion kinase phosphorylation through dissociation of the PAI-urokinase receptor complex from integrin AlfaVBeta3.
Background Increased expression of vitronectin (VN) by smooth muscle cells (SMCs) promotes neointima formation after vascular injury, and may contribute to chronic vascular diseases, such as atherosclerosis.
We found that this mutation, like those causing dominant Cole disease, impairs homo-dimerization of the ENPP1 enzyme which is mediated by its two somatomedin-B-like domains.
OSCC from CCL3-/- mice exhibited lower infiltration of eosinophils and reduced expression of Egf, Fgf1, Tgf-Beta1, Vegfa, Vegfb, Itga-4, Vtn, Mmp-1a, Mmp-2 and Mmp-9 than WT mice.
Germline mutations in the SDHD tumour suppressor gene (11q23.1) predispose to phaeochromocytomas and paragangliomas (PPGL) mainly on a paternal transmission.
At least 12 genes (FH, HIF2A, MAX, NF1, RET, SDHA, SDHB, SDHC, SDHD, SDHAF2, TMEM127, and VHL) have been implicated in inherited predisposition to phaeochromocytoma (PCC), paraganglioma (PGL), or head and neck paraganglioma (HNPGL) and a germline mutation may be detected in more than 30% of cases.
Cabazitaxel antitumor activity was assessed in mice bearing intracranial human glioblastoma (SF295; U251) xenografts, and subcutaneous cell line-derived human pediatric sarcoma (rhabdomyosarcoma RH-30; Ewing's sarcoma TC-71 and SK-ES-1) or patient-derived pediatric sarcoma (osteosarcoma DM77 and DM113; Ewing's sarcoma DM101) xenografts.
We investigated the future therapeutic use of LAK adoptive immunotherapy by examining LAK in vitro cytotoxicity from both neonatal and adult mononuclear cells against solid tumor cell lines of relevance to pediatric oncology: SH-SY5Y (neuroblastoma), SK-NM-C (neuroblastoma-neuroepithelioma), NEP-1 (Wilms' tumor), SK-ES-1 (Ewing's sarcoma), and A-204 (rhabdomyosarcoma).
The DD genotype of the angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) gene is over-represented in Finnish patients with obstetric cholestasis (OC).
We examined the effect of an aqueous garlic extract (AGE) on the ACE activity, cholestasis-induced liver fibrosis, and associated renal dysfunction in comparison with the effect of the standard drug enalapril.
Laboratory studies detected: cholestasis, pancytopenia and elevaton of angiotensin-converting enzyme.
The aim of this study was to examine the preventative and therapeutic effects of an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor, perindopril, on cholestasis-induced liver fibrosis.
Mutations in Krev1 interaction trapped gene 1 (KRIT1) cause cerebral cavernous malformation, an autosomal dominant disease featuring malformation of cerebral capillaries resulting in cerebral hemorrhage, strokes, and seizures.
As evidence was shown that abnormal shortening of telomeres begins to accumulate in myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) patients, this study was conducted to determine the relationship between the mRNA expression levels of telomere-binding proteins (TRF1/TRF2/TIN2/TPP1/POT1/RAP1) and the risk level in MDS.
Radiation risks of multiple myeloma and chronic lymphocytic leukemia were found.Molecular effects of remote period after radiation exposure include changes in gene expression TERF1, TERF2, CCND1, telomere length, the protein expression of cyclin D1, histone gamma H2AX.
Key points include the research results of XRCC1 and XPD gene polymorphism in thyroid cancer patients, CD38 gene GG genotype as a risk factor for chronic lymphocytic leukemia, frequency of 185delAG and 5382insC mutations in BRCA1 gene in women with breast cancer, cognitive function and TERF1, TERF2, TERT gene expression both with telomere length in human under the low dose radiation exposure.
Moreover, we found that Beta-TrCP1 is essential for regulation of promyelocytic leukemia body recruitment of TRF1 in U2OS cells.
Two regions have been previously implicated in autoimmune disease: KLRG1 (P = 6 x 10-7 [Asian cluster]) and SH2D2A (P = 2 x 10-6 [all participants]).
Studies in mouse and man have indicated that reduced expression of TSAd in T cells may predispose toward the development of autoimmune disease.
In lupus-prone TSAd-deficient mice the development of autoimmunity is associated with an impaired T cell death response to antigens in vivo.
We now show that TSAd-deficient mice are susceptible to lupus-like autoimmune disease.
We further show that immunization of younger C57BL/6 TSAd-deficient mice (at age 2 mo) with pristane, a recognized nonspecific inflammatory trigger of lupus, results in more severe glomerulonephritis compared with C57BL/6 controls and the production of high titer ss and ds DNA antibodies of the IgG subclass that are not normally produced by C57BL/6 mice in this model.
CD5+ DLBCL presenting as splenic infarct is very rare.
In a murine model of Duchenne muscular dystrophy, mdx mice, cysteine-nitrosylation of the calcium release channel/ryanodine receptor type 1 (RyR1) on the skeletal muscle sarcoplasmic reticulum causes depletion of the stabilizing subunit calstabin1 (FKBP12) from the RyR1 macromolecular complex.
On the basis of these findings, we propose that sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2+ leak via RyR1 due to S-nitrosylation of the channel and calstabin-1 depletion contributes to muscle weakness in muscular dystrophy, and that preventing the RyR1-mediated sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2+ leak may provide a new therapeutic approach.
We here describe the genetic background of this disorder: some of the most mutated genes that are responsible for the disease are (G4.5 (tafazzin gene): alpha-dystrobrevin gene (DTNA); FKBP-12 gene; lamin A/C gene; Cypher/ZASP (LIM, LDB3) gene); and some genotype-phenotype correlations (Becker muscular dystrophy, Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy or Barth syndrome) based on the literature review.
Histologically, the PNET-like component showed morphological features akin to anaplastic medulloblastoma highlighted by widespread immunoreactivity for BetaIII-tubulin (TUBB3) and nonphosphorylated neurofilament protein, and to a lesser degree, Neu-N, synaptophysin, and CD99, whereas the gliomatous component was demarcated by glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) labeling.
To compare bladder cancer incidence between patients initiating pioglitazone treatment and patients initiating treatment with dipeptidyl-peptidase-4 inhibitors [DPP-4s] or sulfonylureas.
Pioglitazone initiators had an increased incidence of bladder cancer (308 vs 204 [DPP-4s] or 231 [sulfonylureas] per 100 000 person-years; aHR, 1.57 [1.23-2.00] vs DPP-4s and 1.32 [1.02-1.70] vs sulfonylureas).
Pioglitazone was associated with an elevated risk of bladder cancer compared with DPP-4s and sulfonylureas.
In this report, we show that binding of soluble anti-CD26 monoclonal antibody (mAb) inhibits the growth of the human renal carcinoma cells in both in vitro and in vivo experiments.
The in vivo growth-inhibitory effect of anti-CD26 mAb was also assessed in a human renal carcinoma mouse xenograft model.
Experiments with a mouse xenograft model involving human renal carcinoma cells show that anti-CD26 mAb treatment drastically inhibits tumor growth in tumor-bearing mice, resulting in enhanced survival.
Taken together, our data strongly suggest that anti-CD26 mAb treatment may have potential clinical use for CD26-positive renal cell carcinomas.
Previously, we have reported that overexpression of IHPK2 (inositol hexakisphosphate kinase 2) sensitized NIH-OVCAR-3 ovarian carcinoma cell lines to the growth-suppressive and apoptotic effects of IFN-beta (interferon-beta) treatment and gamma-irradiation.
Apo2L/TRAIL expression and nuclear localization of IHPK2 are both required for the induction of apoptosis by IFN-beta in ovarian carcinoma.
IP6K2 is post-transcriptionally induced by IFN-beta in ovarian carcinoma cells.
The histamine H1-receptor antagonist bepotastine improved encephalomyocarditis viral myocarditis.
Histamine H1 receptor expression has been reported to change in disorders such as allergic rhinitis, autoimmune myocarditis, rheumatoid arthritis and atherosclerosis.
Recent evidence indicates that a few human microRNAs (miRNAs), in particular hsa-miR-199a-3p and hsa-miR-590-3p, stimulate proliferation of cardiomyocytes and, once expressed in the mouse heart using viral vectors, induce cardiac regeneration after myocardial infarction.
The present study focuses on the role of hsa-miR-590-3p and its function in Parkinson's disease (PD).
To investigate whether rs12731181 (A-&gt;G) interrupted miR-590-3p-mediated suppression of the prostaglandin F2Alfa receptor (FP) and whether it is associated with essential hypertension in the Chinese population.
rs12731181 in the seed region of the miR-590-3p target site is associated with increased risk of essential hypertension and represents a new paradigm for FP involvement in blood pressure regulation.
The meta-analysis showed that anti-VEGF/VEGFR agents were associated with smaller size (standardized mean difference (SMD) -0.96, 95% CI -1.31 to -0.62; P &lt; 0.0001) and weight (SMD -1.70, 95% CI -2.75 to -0.65; P = 0.002) of endometriosis lesions, relative to the untreated controls, as well as a lower incidence rate of endometriosis (risk ratio 0.26, 95% CI 0.07 to 0.93; P = 0.038) and endometriosis score (SMD -1.17, 95% CI -1.65 to -0.69; P &lt; 0.0001); the number of follicles were similar (SMD -0.78, 95% CI -1.65 to 0.09; P = 0.08).
CA125 was associated with endometriosis in the overall population (SMD 0.82, 95% CI 0.72, 0.92), Caucasian subgroup (SMD 1.08, 95% CI 0.96, 1.19), and early (SMD 1.20, 95% CI 0.93, 1.48) or advanced disease (SMD 1.29, 95% CI 1.04, 1.55).
Prospective clinical trials are mandatory to analyze the safety of ACE-inhibitors and benzodiazepines in elderly patients with diabetes.
5A5A and 5A6A genotypes of MMP-3 (odds ratio (OR) 1.5; P = 0.021), II and ID genotypes of ACE (OR 1.7; P = 0.006) along with traditional ischaemic heart disease risk factors such as smoking (OR 4.9; P = 0.001), hypertension (OR 2.0; P = 0.001), diabetes mellitus (OR 2.9; P = 0.001) and dyslipidaemia (OR 2.1; P = 0.001) increased the risk of STEMI.
To determine if elderly women &gt; 60 who practice physical activity regularly had differences in sarcopenic obesity according to the I/D polymorphism from the ACE (angiotensin converter enzyme) gen. Cross-sectional study of 300 elderly women who have practiced physical exercise at least twice a week for the past two years.
Anthropometric data, physical activity and sedentary behaviour questionnaire, sarcopenic obesity (determining the percentage of fat mass and total muscle mass by electrical impedance and grouping the quintiles of these values into four groups) and physical fitness assessment, as well as ACE gen genotype measured by oral mucosa sample, were evaluated.
There were significant differences (p &lt; 0.05) in sarcopenic obesity according to ACE I/D genotype (SO values: 2.18 ACE DD vs 2.48 ACE II + ACE ID).
Women who were ACE DD presented lower risk of sarcopenic obesity than those in the ACE II and ACE ID groups.
To determine the prevalence of obesity according to the AACE/ACE framework based on a complications-centric model with further application of the Cardiometabolic Disease Staging (CMDS) system in Venezuelan population.
AACE/ACE framework definitions: overweight: body mass index (BMI) 25 to 29.9 kg/m2 and no obesity-related complications (ORC); obesity stage 0: BMI &gt;= 30 and no ORC; stage 1: BMI &gt;= 25 and one or more mild-to-moderate ORC; and stage 2: BMI &gt;= 25 and one or more severe ORC.
The prevalence of obesity according to the AACE/ACE framework was 63.5%: overweight 3.0% (95% CI: 2.1 - 3.9); obesity stage 0: 0.1% (0.07 - 0.27); obesity stage 1: 26.6% (24.2 - 29.0); and obesity stage 2: 36.4% (33.8 - 39.0).
In a general population study, applying the AACE/ACE framework for obesity and CMDS increased the detection of ORC and therefore higher risk subjects compared to classic anthropometric measurements.
Among Shors, the following factors increased AH risk: female sex, age, hypercholesterolemia, hyperbetacholesterinemia, hypertriglyceridemia, obesity (including transabdominal obesity), glucose intolerance, and the DD ACE, CT MTHFR, and AA ADRB1 genotypes; among the non-indigenous population, the main factors were age, hypercholesterolemia, hyperbetacholesterinemia, hypoalfacholesterinemia, hypertriglyceridemia, obesity (including transabdominal obesity), and ID ACE genotype.
We examined whether Beta-blockers and ACE inhibitors (ACEI) are associated with differential effects on mortality in CHF patients with and without diabetes.
Patients with diabetes were prescribed larger doses of Beta-blocker and ACEI than were patients without diabetes.
Increasing ACEI dose was associated with lower mortality in patients with diabetes (5.9% per mg/day; 95% CI 2.5-9.2) and without diabetes (5.1% per mg/day; 95% CI 2.6-7.6), with similar effect size in these groups (interaction P = 0.76).
We report on a prenatal diagnosis of severe ventriculomegaly in association with spinal dysraphism that was indicative of a Currarino syndrome (CS) due to a c.584delA, p.H195fsX28 truncated mutation within the HLXB9 gene.
This study demonstrated that immunotherapy with both IL-2 and GM-CSF may be useful to treat multidrug resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB).
Neuroblastomas with poor prognosis are often characterized by 1p36 deletion, containing the kinesin gene KIF1B.
KIF1B is a candidate tumor-suppressor gene in neuroblastoma whose function is to mediate apoptosis when nerve growth factor becomes limiting in the developing nervous system.
Inherited KIF1B loss-of-function mutations in neuroblastomas and pheochromocytomas implicate the kinesin KIF1B as a 1p36.2 tumor suppressor.
Moreover, neuroblastomas with chromosomal deletion of 1p36 exhibit loss of KIF1BBeta expression and impaired DHX9 nuclear localization, implicating the loss of DHX9 nuclear activity in neuroblastoma pathogenesis.
KIF1BBeta has neuroblastoma tumor-suppressor properties and promotes and requires nuclear-localized DHX9 for its apoptotic function by activating XAF1 expression.
At least three genes (HDNB1/UFD2, KIAA0591F/KIF1B-beta, and PEX14) were differentially expressed at high levels in favorable and at low levels in unfavorable subsets of primary neuroblastoma.
KIAA0591 was expressed in favorable NBLs at higher levels than in unfavorable NBLs, although RT-PCR SSCP analysis showed no mutation within the coding region of the KIAA0591 gene, when 8 neuroblastoma tissues and 15 neuroblastoma-derived cell lines were examined.
The CMRS, PTGi, and plethysmography total power index (PTGVLFi) differed significantly between the diabetes patients and healthy participants.
The specificity and sensitivity for the CMRS, PTGi, and PTVLFi comparing the diabetes patients with healthy controls were high.
In conclusion, type-2 diabetes is associated with higher COX-2 expression, but lower eNOS and PGIS expression in subcutaneous arteries.
Eplerenone did not affect obesity-induced upregulation of cyclooxygenase (COX)-1 or prostacyclin synthase.
Five proteins potentially associated with CHD (beta-2 microglobulin (B2M), alpha-1-acid glycoprotein 1 (ORM1), thrombospondin-1(THBS1), complement factor D pre-protein (CFD), and insulin-like growth factor binding protein 1 (IGFBP1)) and five potentially associated with stroke (B2M, IGFBP2, IGFBP4, IGFBP6, and hemopexin (HPX)) had high discovery phase significance level ranking and an available ELISA assay, and were included in case-control validation studies within the Women's Health Initiative (WHI) hormone therapy trials.
B2M, THBS1, and CFD were confirmed (P &lt;0.05) as novel CHD risk markers, and B2M, IGFBP2, and IGFBP4 were confirmed as novel stroke disease risk markers, while the assay for HPX proved to be unreliable.
Our study provides a new insight into the potential neuroprotective role of HPX as a contributing factor of endogenous protective mechanisms against focal cerebral ischemia injury, and HPX might be developed as a potential agent for treatment of ischemic stroke.
Hemopexin provides neuroprotection in mouse models of stroke and intracerebral hemorrhage and protects neurons in vitro against heme or reactive oxygen species (ROS) toxicity via heme oxygenase-1 (HO1) activity.
Hemopexin is a serum, CSF, and neuronal protein that is protective after experimental stroke.
We found six proteins that were upregulated in IIH (sterol regulatory element-binding protein 1, zinc-alpha-2-glycoprotein, immunoglobulin heavy constant alpha 1 [IGHA1], alpha-1-antitrypsin [SERPINA1], serotransferrin, haptoglobin) and four proteins that were downregulated (hemopexin, angiotensinogen, vitamin-D-binding protein, transthyretin).
We propose that the heme-HPX system protects against stroke-related damage by maintaining a tight balance between free and bound heme.
The aim of this study was to determine whether endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) polymorphisms are associated with susceptibility to systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
To analyze the prognostic value of the polymorphisms of the thrombophilic genes: plasminogen activator inhibitor type 1 (PAI-1) (-675 4G/5G), factor XIII (FXIII) (G485T), fibrinogen (FBG) (G(-455)A), glycoprotein Ia (GPIa) (C807T), glycoprotein IIIa (GPIIIa) (T106C), and p22phox (C242T), as well as protein genes involved in the pathogenesis of endothelial dysfunction: subunits of p22phox NADH-oxidase (p22phox) (C242T), endothelial NO-synthase (eNOS) (G894T), and methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) (C677T) for the development of antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) and a type of progressive lupous nephritis (LN) in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).
The aim of this study was to examine the distribution of lectin-like oxidised LDL receptor-1 (LOX-1) levels in patients with active BD, possible association of LOX-1 with the oxidised LDL (oxLDL), endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS), nitric oxide (NO), endothelin-1 (ET-1) levels, and to characterise the differences between patients with active BD and those with systemic lupus erythematosus( SLE) in terms of these parameters compared with healthy controls.
Therapeutic application of TRAIL or agonistic anti-DR5 mAb (MD5-1) dramatically improved survival of S. pneumoniae-infected WT mice.
We have identified a previously unrecognized mechanism by which neutrophil-derived TRAIL induces apoptosis of DR5-expressing macrophages, thus promoting early bacterial killing in pneumococcal pneumonia.
Previously, we have shown that an AP-1 family member, FRA-2, is constitutively expressed in adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma (ATL) and, together with JUND, upregulates CCR4 and promotes ATL cell growth.
Previously, we investigated the transcriptional control of CCR4 expression in ATLL and have found that an activating protein 1 (AP1) family member, FBJ murine osteosarcoma viral oncogene homolog (FOS)-related antigen 2 (FRA2), is consistently expressed at high levels in ATLL and, together with v-JUN avian sarcoma virus 17 oncogene homolog D (JUND), up-regulates the expression of CCR4 as well as that of several proto-oncogenes such as v-MYB myeloblastosis viral oncogene homolog (MYB), murine double minute 2 homolog (MDM2), and B-cell lymphoma 6 (BCL6).
The aim of this study was to evaluate the serum GDF-15 levels and their relationship with disease-related characteristics in patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
GDF-15 may play a role in the pathway of disease activity, joint involvement, and atherosclerosis in patients with rheumatoid arthritis.
Serum GDF-15 levels were positively correlated with findings for peripheral arthritis and CRP, and with BDCAF erythema nodosum, BDCAF arthralgia, and BDCAF arthritis scores.
Serum ESR, CRP, white blood cell counts, and GDF-15 levels were significantly higher in the group that was positive for peripheral arthritis (P &lt; 0.05).
Supplementation of corticosterone and cortisol promoted leptin production in murine adipocytes from the 3T3-L1 cell strain and human adipocytes from the Simpson Golabi-Behmel syndrome (SGBS) cell strain, respectively.
When SGBS adipocytes were cultured in these CMs, leptin production was positively associated with cortisol concentrations.
Leptin gene expression and secretion by cultured human primary adipocytes and Simpson-Golabi-Behmel Syndrome adipocytes increased upon coculture with human enterocytic Caco-2 cells or incubation in conditioned medium of Caco-2 cells.
SGBS adipocytes are capable of fat cell-specific metabolic functions such as insulin-stimulated glucose uptake, insulin-stimulated de novo lipogenesis and Beta-adrenergic-stimulated lipolysis and they secrete typical adipokines including leptin, adiponectin, and RBP4.
Induction of hypoxia significantly induced mRNA expression of leptin and apelin in differentiated SGBS adipocytes compared with the normoxic control condition.
During the differentiation process SGBS cells developed a gene expression pattern similar to that found in differentiating human preadipocytes with a characteristic increase in fat cell-specific mRNAs encoding lipoprotein lipase (LPL), glycero-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GPDH), GLUT4, leptin and others.
Body mass index (BMI), serum follicle stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinizing hormone (LH), progesterone, estradiol, testosterone, dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate, fasting glucose, low density lipoprotein (LDL-C), total cholesterol, high density lipoprotein (HDL-C) high sensitive CRP, c-peptide, insulin, insulin sensitivity and carotid intima thickness were compared among different phenotype groups of PCOS: Group 1-PCO (polycystic ovaries)-anovulation (n = 34), Group 2-Hyperandrogenemia (HA)-anovulation (n = 30), Group 3-HA-PCO (n = 32), and Group 4-HA-PCO-anovulation (n = 43).
Only 7 of the 23 (30%) reported PYGL alleles carry nonsense, splice site or frameshift mutations compared to 68-80% of affected alleles of the highly homologous muscle glycogen phosphorylase gene, PYGM, that underlie McArdle disease.
Glycogen storage disease type VI (GSD6) defines a group of disorders that cause hepatomegaly and hypoglycemia with reduced liver phosphorylase activity.
We report the identification of the first mutations in PYGL, the gene encoding the liver isoform of glycogen phosphorylase, in three patients with Hers disease.
Our findings demonstrate that PYGL mutations cause Hers disease, and they may improve laboratory diagnosis of deficiencies of the liver phosphorylase system.
The enzyme deficient in glycogen storage disease type VI, liver glycogen phosphorylase (PYGL), has been localized by in situ hybridization to 14q21--&gt;q22, near the q21--&gt;q22 band interface.
To investigate the characteristics of blood lipids, insulin metabolism, and paraoxonase-2-311 (PON2-311) polymorphism among patients with Alzheimer's disease with different types of dementia.
No significant differences were found for PON2-311 genotypes or allele frequencies in patients with dementia due to Alzheimer's disease.
Alzheimer's disease-related genes, such as APOE, A2M, PON2 and MAP4, and cardiovascular disease-associated genes, including COMT, CBS and WNK1, all congregated in a single module.
The common polymorphism at codon 311 (C311S) of paraoxonase 2 gene (PON2) was investigated in 165 patients with sporadic late-onset Alzheimer's disease (LOAD) and 174 controls in Chinese.
(3-8) The importance of cardiovascular risk factors in the pathomechanism of Alzheimer's disease (AD) and vascular dementia (VD)(9-13) prompted us to examine the genetic effect of PON2 gene codon 311 (Cys--&gt;Ser; PON2*S) polymorphism and the relationship between the PON2*S allele and the other dementia risk factor, the apoE polymorphism in these dementias.
The clinical charts of 152 patients with hereditary glaucoma from18 Spanish eye centres were reviewed in order to make an epidemiologic description of the type of glaucoma and associated factors.
Transgenic mice overexpressing Norrin in the retina (Pax6-Norrin) were generated and crossed with DBA/2J mice with hereditary glaucoma and optic nerve axonal degeneration.
The association of the WDR36 gene with glaucoma has been controversial in the literature.
We therefore conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis to assess the association of all reported common polymorphisms in WDR36 with primary open angle glaucoma (POAG) and its subtypes: high tension glaucoma (HTG) and normal tension glaucoma (NTG).
Enrichment of qualifying variants toward glaucoma was present in all genes except WDR36, in which controls harbored more variants, and TBK1, in which no qualifying variants were detected in cases or controls.
We report two unrelated patients with features of cranio-osteoarthropathy, both of whom also had a history of congenital heart disease.
We speculate that the clinical observation that prenatal glucocorticoid treatment reduces the incidence of patent ductus arteriosus in premature infants may in part be due to the stimulatory effect of glucocorticoid on the activity of 15-PGDH in fetal and neonatal lung and possibly other organs.
The aim of our study was to determine if BRCA2 mutation carriers were more likely than noncarriers to demonstrate chronic pancreatitis-like changes on EUS.
Compared with controls, BRCA2 mutation carriers had a higher prevalence of solid pancreas lesions (16.2% vs 1.08%; P = 0.005), pancreatic cysts (21.6% vs 6.1%; P = 0.01), Rosemont "consistent with chronic pancreatitis" definition changes (13.5% vs 1%; P = 0.002), and Rosemont "suggestive of chronic pancreatitis" definition changes (16.2% vs 2.1%; P = 0.003).
After adjusting for age, alcohol use, and smoking, BRCA2 mutation carriers were almost 25 times more likely to demonstrate chronic pancreatitis-like changes.
Chronic pancreatitis-like changes, along with solid and cystic pancreatic lesions, were significantly more common in BRCA2 mutation carriers than in noncarriers.
Such subsets of familial pancreatic cancer involve germline cationic trypsinogen or PRSS1 mutations (hereditary pancreatitis), BRCA2 mutations (usually in association with hereditary breast-ovarian cancer syndrome), CDKN2 mutations (familial atypical mole and multiple melanoma), or DNA repair gene mutations (e.g., ATM and PALB2, apart from those in BRCA2).
DIS, IDHAS, and no confirmable syndrome typing were dominant in asymptomatic HIV infection patients.
Immunization in a prime-boost strategy using DNA and LC16m8Delta expressing SIV Gag elicited 7-30-fold more IFN-gamma-producing T cells in mice than that using DNA and non-replicating vaccinia DIs recombinant strain.
These results suggest that genome dimerization or DIS/DLS itself also plays an important role in the early stages of virus infection.
A highly attenuated vaccinia virus substrain of Dairen-I (DIs) shows promise as a candidate vector for eliciting positive immunity against immune deficiency virus.
To investigate the impact of that deletion and of the subsequent insertion of a foreign gene into that region of DIs on the ability of the DIs recombinant to induce antigen-specific immunity, we generated a recombinant vaccinia DIs expressing fulllength gag and pol genes of simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) (rDIsSIV gag/pol) and studied the biological and immunological characteristics of the recombinant natural mutant.
While rDIsSIV gag/pol produces SIV proteins in mammalian HeLa and CV-1 cells, recombinant modified vaccinia Ankara strain (MVA) expressing SIV gag and pol genes (MVA/SIV239 gag/pol) clearly replicates in HeLa and CV-1 cell lines under synchronized growth conditions and produces the SIV protein in all cell lines.
Among the signaling pathways in persistently infected cells, Akt and JNK were phosphorylated in SARS-CoV-nucleocapsid (N) protein-expressing Vero E6 cells using vaccinia viral vector (DIs), strongly suggesting that N protein-induced phosphorylation of Akt and JNK are necessary to establish persistence.
We constructed a series of recombinant DIs (rDIs), a highly attenuated vaccinia strain, expressing a gene encoding four structural proteins (E, M, N and S) of SARS-CoV individually or simultaneously.
To assess their potential for a vaccine, we used Mycobacterium bovis bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG)-Tokyo and a replication-deficient vaccinia virus strain (DIs) as vectors to express full-length gag from simian immunodeficiency viruses (SIVs) (rBCG-SIVgag and rDIsSIVgag).
These results suggest that a recombinant M. bovis BCG-based vector may have potential as an HIV/AIDS vaccine when administered in combination with a replication-deficient vaccinia virus DIs vector in a priming-boosting strategy.
The results indicated that of the 56 acupoints for facial palsy collected in the literature, Shuigou (GV 26), Dicang (ST 4), Jiache (ST 6), Hegu(LI 4), Fengchi(GB 20), Zusanli (ST 36), Neiting (ST 44), Tinghui (GB 2), Chengjiang (CV 24) and Shangguan (GB 3) are the core acupoints in clinical application.
In this study, we sought to probe the central mechanisms of the specific correlation between LI4 and orofacial part in Bell's palsy patients.
In total, 36 patients with left Bell's palsy were divided into three groups in random order, and each group received transcutaneous electrical acupoint stimulation (TEAS) at only one of three acupoints (LI4, ST6, and a sham point).
The densities of chromogranin A, serotonin, peptide YY and oxyntomodulin cells were significantly higher, and those of pancreatic peptide and somatostatin cells were lower in rats with DSS-induced colitis than in the controls.
Thus we hypothesized that NHE8 expression is inhibited during colitis and that SST treatment during pathological conditions can restore NHE8 expression.
Our study uncovered a novel mechanism of SST stimulation of NHE8 expression in colitis.
Somatostatin receptors also mediate the complex effects of somatostatin on the gastrointestinal tract and may be defensive in inflammatory bowel diseases, such as ulcerative colitis.
A 58-year-old female patient with diagnosis of acromegaly and ulcerative colitis was started on long-acting somatostatin treatment as a first-line treatment for acromegaly as she refused to undergo transsphenoidal surgery.
The expression levels of melanoma-associated antigen (MAGE) A, MAGE-C1/CT7, cancer/testis antigen 1B (CTAG1B) and G antigen (GAGE) were analyzed by immunohistochemistry.
In papillary and follicular carcinoma, MAGE-A was present in 8.1% of cases, GAGE in 10.8% and CT/7MAGE-C1 and CTAG1B in 2.7% each.
In medullary carcinoma, CT antigen expression was as follows: MAGE-A in 42.9% of patients; MAGE-C1/CT7 in 46.5%; GAGE in 92.9%; and CTAG1B in 3.6%.
In poorly differentiated and anaplastic carcinoma cases, CT antigen expression was as follows: MAGE-A in 61.8% of cases; MAGE-C1 in 57.1%; GAGE in 66.7%; and CTAG1B in 14.4%.
A vaccine consisting of 9 MHC class I-restricted breast cancer-associated peptides (from MAGE-A1, -A3, and -A10, CEA, NY-ESO-1, and HER2 proteins) was combined with a TLR3 agonist, poly-ICLC, along with a helper peptide derived from tetanus toxoid.
We assessed expression of HM1.24 and the CTAs MAGE-A3, NY-ESO-1/2, WT-1 and HMMR in CD138-purified myeloma cell samples of previously untreated myeloma patients in the GMMG-MM5 multicenter-trial by gene expression profiling (GEP; n = 458) and RNA-sequencing (n = 152) as potential population regarding vaccination trials.
In this phase I dose escalation study, we treated eight patients with high-risk surgically resected stage II-IV melanoma with intravenous autologous monocyte-derived DCs loaded with the NKT cell agonist Alfa-GalCer and peptides derived from the cancer testis antigen NY-ESO-1.
Lung cancer cell line demethylation resulting from 5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine treatment was associated with both NY-ESO-1 and PD-L1 re-expression in vitro but not increased chemosensitivity.
Collectively, these results provided supporting evidence for the potential use of NY-ESO-1 hypomethylation as a prognostic biomarker in stage 3 NSCLCs.
Twenty-eight out of 38 cancer specimens exhibited NY-ESO-1 protein expression, 2/38 showed a strong universal (4+) NY-ESO-1 staining, and 9/40 cancer lesions exhibited a strong (4+) staining for survivin.
NY-ESO-1 or survivin expression in glioma represents viable targets for anticancer-directed T-cells for the biological therapy of patients with glioma.
Fifteen patients with II to III stage positive HLA -A0201+ and NY-ESO-1+ were enrolled in the Cancer Hospital Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences on the basis of preclinical experiments from November 2014 to October 2015, and their peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) and peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBLs) were isolated.
Auto-DCs pulsed with NY-ESO-1 peptides can induce the proliferation of allogenic CTLs, which elicit specific immune responses ex vivo or in vivo, and boost anticancer immunity markedly.
Data from these analyses indicated that GATA-binding protein 4 (GATA4) was able to mediate NOX4 transcription and is downregulated in human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) that were exposed to hyperglycemic conditions as well as in the endothelial cells of a mouse diabetes model.
Results from these experiments demonstrated that GATA4 may inhibit diabetes-induced endothelial dysfunction by acting as a transcription factor for NOX4 expression and increasing NO production.
Furthermore, hyperglycemia markedly increased Nox4 activity and reduced the activation of Nrf2 by suppressing its up-stream regulatory Akt as well as down-stream target HO-1.
Our results provide evidence indicating that JQ1 treatment could modulate Nox4-Nrf2 redox imbalance in the hippocampus and may be a promising agent for diabetes-associated cognitive dysfunction.
However, Nox4 deletion did not affect the metabolic profile under a high-fat diet in males or females, but increased glucose intolerance in females.
Summer in both species and diabetes in rats downregulated myocardial Nox4 while reciprocally upregulating Nox2 and Nox5 in guinea-pigs, and Nox2 in rats.
In this study, we aimed to investigate norbin expression patterns in epilepsy and to elucidate the relationships between norbin and mGluR5 and p-CaMKII in epilepsy.
Thus, our results indicate norbin participates in the pathogenesis of epilepsy, perhaps by modulating mGluR5 signaling, regulating CaMKII phosphorylation, and may exert antiepileptic effects.
Metabotropic glutamate receptor type 5 (mGluR5) abnormalities have been described in tissue resected from epilepsy patients with focal cortical dysplasia (FCD).
To determine if these abnormalities could be identified in vivo, we investigated mGluR5 availability in 10 patients with focal epilepsy and an MRI diagnosis of FCD using positron-emission tomography (PET) and the radioligand [11C]ABP688.
mGluR1Alfa (LY367385) and mGluR5 (MPEP) antagonists were administered 2h following KA-induced status epilepticus and animals were examined after 7days.
Congenital cranial dysinnervation disorders (CCDDs) comprise a heterogeneous spectrum of diseases characterized by congenital, non-progressive impairment of eye, eyelid and/or facial movements including Moebius syndrome, Duane retraction syndrome, congenital ptosis, and congenital fibrosis of the extraocular muscles.
CCDDs are congenital, non-progressive ophthalmoplegia with restriction of globe movement in one or more fields of gaze.
Currently, congenital fibrosis of the extraocular muscles, Duane syndrome, Moebius syndrome, Horizontal gaze palsy and progressive scoliosis, and synergistic divergence are included as CCDDs.
CCDDs have been associated with dominant or recessive monogenic mutations in at least 7 different genes (CHN1, SALL4, HOXA1, KIF21A, PHOX2A, TUBB3, ROBO3) that cause phenotypes such as Duane retraction syndrome, congenital fibrosis of the extraocular muscles, and horizontal gaze palsy with progressive scoliosis.
Recent literature contains new genotypic and phenotypic descriptions of Duane retraction syndrome, Moebius syndrome, and other CCDDs.
Certain forms of congenital incomitant strabismus are associated with abnormal cranial nerve development and resultant abnormal orbital innervation (eg, Duane retraction syndrome, congenital fibrosis of the extraocular muscles [CFEOM]); such conditions can be considered congenital cranial dysinnervation disorders (CCDDs).
In addition to duction limitation and/or ptosis, orbital CCDD phenotypes include inappropriate extraocular muscle and/or levator innervation by nerves intended for innervation of other structures (eg, some of the innervation intended for the medial rectus muscle inappropriately innervating the ipsilateral lateral rectus muscle in Duane retraction syndrome).
Further CCDD syndromes include the following phenotypes: congenital ptosis, Duane syndrome, horizontal gaze palsy, Moebius' syndrome, and congenital facial palsy.
Massive GI bleeding (33.3%) and bacteremia (25%) were the major causes of pre-fatal leukocytosis in the deceased patients; 33.3% of the patients with pre-fatal profound thrombocytopenia (&lt;20,000/myL), and 50% of the patients with pre-fatal prothrombin time (PT) prolongation experienced massive GI bleeding.
The prevalence of two single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) in MFGE8 was studied in two exsudative or "wet" Age-related Macular Degeneration (AMD) groups and two corresponding control groups.
The antibodies applied were second workshop codes: 3(CAM 5.2), 45 (MOV15), 54 (NCCST433), 75 (PE35), 81 (HMFG-1), 95 (LCA1/L38) and HMFG-2 123C3, F4 and MOC-21.
Seven monoclonal antibodies raised against epithelial antigens (CAM 5.2, MOV 15, NCCST 433, PE 35, LCA1/L38, HMFG 1 AND HMFG 2) were applied on bone marrow sections from three groups of patients (pts): (1) 19 pts in whom SCLC-metastases were detected by CE, (2) 44 pts with SCLC in whom metastases could not be detected by CE, and (3) 20 pts with non-malignant bone marrow diseases.
In this study, we demonstrated that both mature forms of miRNA-485, miR-485-3p and miR-485-5p were involved in regulating mitochondrial respiration, cell migration and cell invasion in breast cancer cells by directly targeting and inhibiting the expression of PGC-1Alfa.
Specifically, the expression levels of both miR-485-3p and miR-485-5p were decreased in breast cancer tissues.
Overexpression of miR-485-3p and miR-485-5p suppressed mitochondrial respiration and potential for cell migration and invasion in vitro, and also inhibited spontaneous metastasis of breast cancer cells in vivo.
Treatment with miRNA-664 (miR-664), miR-485-3p, and miR-495 siRNAs reduced tumor growth, invasion, and metastasis in an orthotopic liver cancer model.
These results reveal the presence of distinct genetic architectures between Caucasian ethnic groups that likely have clinical relevance, among them PROX1 gene is a strong candidate of early onset of diabetes with variations depending on ethnicity.
HHEX and PROX1 are genetic loci associated with diabetes mellitus type 2.
HHEX and PROX1 play significant roles in carbohydrate intolerance and diabetes because these transcription factors may be involved in the regulation of insulin secretion and in glucose and lipid metabolism.
Large-scale meta-analyses of genome-wide association studies have recently confirmed that the rs340874 single-nucleotide polymorphism in PROX1 gene is associated with fasting glycemia and type 2 diabetes mellitus; however, the mechanism of this link was not well established.
Our observations suggest that the PROX1 variants have pleiotropic effect on disease pathways and it seem to be a very interesting goal of research on prevention of obesity and type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Fifteen cases of angiokeratoma corporis diffusum, 10 cases of Fordyce angiokeratoma, 10 cases of Mibelli angiokeratoma and 10 cases of solitary angiokeratoma were examined by immunohistochemical analysis using CD31, D2-40, Prox1 and Wilms' tumor 1 (WT-1).
The vessels of angiokeratoma corporis diffusum, Fordyce angiokeratoma and solitary angiokeratoma were usually focally positive for D2-40 and positive for Prox1, whereas the vessels of Mibelli angiokeratoma were negative for D2-40 and positive for Prox1.
These data suggest that PROX1 SNP rs340874, discovered in fasting glucose GWAS, may also be a pharmacogenetic risk factor for antihypertensive-induced hyperglycemia.
The aim of this study was to analyze whether in chronic lymphocytic leukemia the cytosolic release of histone H1.2, a new apoptogenic mechanism induced by DNA damage, was associated with the presence of genetic abnormalities and with the response to treatment.
Primary tumoral chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells from 25 patients were investigated for histone H1.2 cytosolic release after treatment with genotoxic (fludarabine, mitoxantrone, etoposide, or X-ray radiation) and non-genotoxic (dexamethasone) agents.
Non-DNA-damaging agents induced release of H1.2 in both p53-deleted and non-deleted chronic lymphocytic leukemia cases.
In chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells, histone H1.2 traffic was dependent on the p53-status after genotoxic treatment, but could also be induced after treatments that acted independently of p53.
Nuclear histone H1.2 release appears to be an important element in apoptosis induction in chronic lymphocytic leukemia, particularly in cases with abnormal p53 function resistant to conventional treatment.
Our analysis provides evidence that the use of CDK 4/6 inhibitors is associated with an increased risk of all-grade and high-grade hematological adverse events, which seems to be a class-effect, but not of febrile neutropenia compared with hormonal therapy alone.
The highest class-specific risks were neutropenia grade 3-4 for CDK4/6 inhibitors (OR 40.77; 95% CI 19.52-85.19), stomatitis grade 3-4 for mTOR inhibitors (OR 11.92; 95% CI 3.68-38.57), hyperglycemia grade 3-4 for PI3K inhibitors (OR 40.93; 95% CI 10.08-166.22) and diarrhea for anti-HER2 agents (OR 9.93; 95% CI 4.71-20.95).
However, the neutropenia associated with CDK4/6 inhibitors is distinct from chemotherapy-induced neutropenia in that it is rapidly reversible, reflecting a cytostatic effect on neutrophil precursors in the bone marrow.
Patients treated with CDK 4/6 inhibitors had an AR of grade 3/4 neutropenia of 61%; neutropenic fever and infections were rare (1% and 3%, respectively).
Neutropenia is the most commonly reported hematologic toxicity following treatment with palbociclib, a cyclin-dependent kinase 4/6 inhibitor approved for metastatic breast cancer.
Knockout of Gnb3 in mice results in dysfunction of cone photoreceptors and ON-bipolar cells and a naturally occurring chicken mutation leads to retinal degeneration.
Whole-exome sequencing of a family screened negative for mutations in genes associated with CSNB identified biallelic mutations in the guanine nucleotide-binding protein subunit beta-3 gene (GNB3).
Mutational analysis of GNB3 in a cohort of 58 subjects with CSNB identified a sporadic case individual with a homozygous GNB3 mutation (c.200C&gt;T [p.Ser67Phe]).
Homozygosity mapping ruled out most known CSNB candidates as well as CACNA2D4 and GNB3.
The 3-locus MDR model comprising FTO rs8050136C/A and GNB3 rs1129649T/C and rs5443C/T emerged as the best disease conferring model.
Lack of GNB3 signalling causes reduced phosphorylation activity of ERK2 and AKT leading to severe pathological phenotypes such as blindness and renal abnormalities in rge chickens.
We investigated the prevalence of common polymorphisms that have been associated with diseases, such as atherosclerosis (ALOX5), hypertension (CYP3A5, AGT, GNB3), diabetes (CAPN10, TCF7L2, PTPN22), prostate cancer (DG8S737, rs1447295), Hirschsprung disease (RET), and age-related macular degeneration (CFH, LOC387715).
In this review the authors summarise the most important cell-surface bound pathogenical factors such as fibrinogen, fibronectin, thrombin, collagen, laminin and vitronectin-binding proteins and extracellular virulence enzymes of Candida albicans and some microbiological aspects of oral candidiasis (candidosis).
Predicted pathogenic CHD7 variants have been identified in individuals with isolated features of CHARGE including autism and hypogonadotropic hypogonadism.
We previously demonstrated that a part of human CHD7 interacts with a part of human CHD8, another chromodomain helicase DNA binding protein presumably being involved in the pathogenesis of neurodevelopmental (NDD) and autism spectrum disorders (ASD).
Focal or weak expression was seen in malignant fibrous histiocytoma (2/27), synovial sarcoma (1/11), Ewing sarcoma (1/5), and epithelioid sarcoma (3/5), whereas one epithelioid sarcoma displayed strong expression for Arpp.
IL-21, a Tfh cell-derived cytokine, provides instructional cues for GC B cell maturation, with disruption of IL-21 signaling representing a potential therapeutic strategy for autoantibody-driven diseases such as systemic lupus erythematosus.
Anti-IL-21 treatment also led to a reduction in GC B cells, CD138hi plasmablasts, IFN-Gamma-dependent IgG2c production, and autoantibodies, indicating that Tfh cell-derived IL-21 is critical for pathological B cell cues in lupus.
In spite of convincing evidence for the use of mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) in lupus nephritis, the German "Gemeinsame Bundesausschuss" (GBA) has not yet decided on its reimbursement.
Applying this information to other autoimmune diseases, IIM patients displayed positive GC-A/GC-B log-ratios, indicating predominant IFNAlfa activity.
We now find that EBV-encoded latent membrane protein 2A (LMP2A) mimics B-cell antigen receptor (BCR) signaling in murine GC B cells, causing altered humoral immune responses and autoimmune diseases.
GC B-cell-specific LMP2A expression led to systemic lupus erythematosus-like autoimmune phenotypes in an age-dependent manner.
We propose that these previously unidentified cells, designated "rogue GC B cells," are a major driver of autoantibody production and provide a mechanistic explanation for the linked production of IgE and autoantibodies in autoimmune disease.
This is the first report implicating RXRA in CHD with 9q duplication, providing additional data in understanding the genetic etiology of tetralogy of Fallot, CHD, and disorders linked to 9q microduplication syndrome.
To investigate the effects of carnitine on cardiac function, collagen contents, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha (PPARalpha) and retinoid X receptor alpha (RXRct) expressions in a rat alcoholic cardiomyopathy modeL.
In this study, we show that an established model of congenital heart disease, the retinoid X receptor alpha knockout (RXRalpha-/-) embryo, displays a malformed epicardium.
The immunomodulatory receptor Siglec-3/CD33 influences risk for late-onset Alzheimer's disease (LOAD), an apparently human-specific post-reproductive disease.
Genome-wide association studies and meta-analyses implicated that increased risk of developing Alzheimer's diseases (AD) has been associated with the ABCA7, APOE, BIN1, CASS4, CD2AP, CD33, CELF1, CLU, CR1, DSG2, EPHA1, FERMT2, HLA-DRB1, HLA-DRB4, INPP5D, MEF2C, MS4A4A, MS4A4E, MS4A6E, NME8, PICALM, PLD3, PTK2B, RIN3, SLC24A4, SORL1, and ZCWPW1 genes.
The association of variants in CLU, CR1, PICALM, BIN1, ABCA7, and CD33 genes with late-onset Alzheimer's disease (LOAD) was evaluated and confirmed through genome-wide association study.
This study therefore examined whether the functionally relevant PTPN22 polymorphism is associated with Wegener's granulomatosis (WG).
The results showed that in vivo, the expression of osteopontin (OPN) vascular cell adhesion molecule (VCAM-1), and levels of integrin AlfavBeta3 in the aortic tissue in SCH and Hypothyroidism (CH) groups was higher than in the control group.
We analyzed concentrations of osteopontin (OPN) in patients with pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) in order to determine firstly whether it is useful to distinguish between PDAC patients and those with chronic non-hereditary pancreatitis (CP) and type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), and secondly whether OPN concentrations depend on the PDAC stage.
Our pilot study demonstrates the usefulness of estimating OPN levels to differentiate between pancreatic cancer and chronic pancreatitis.
We aimed to test IRX3's roles in the browning program and to evaluate the association between the genetic variants in IRX3 and human obesity.
Rare variants of IRX3 were associated with human obesity.
Recent prevalent research topic concentrated in the three neighboring genes of FTO: RPGRIP1L, IRX3 and IRX5, as having a functional link between obesity-associated common variants within FTO and the observed human phenotypes.
IRX3 expression has been functionally associated in obesity-associated long-distance susceptibility loci, but the effect of the IRX3 genetic variants on human obesity and obesity-related metabolism remains uncertain.
IRX3 genetic variants associate with birth weight, BMI and AST/ALT-related transaminase metabolism, supporting the role of IRX3 as an obesity-associated susceptibility gene.
The fat mass and obesity associated (Fto) and iroquois homeobox 3 (Irx3) genes have been recognised as important obesity-related genes.
The analysis of the FTO-IRX3 locus revealed high LD and high order gene-gene interactions for BMI linked obesity.
In this multi-analytical approach, FTO rs9939609 and IRX3 rs3751723, along with TCF7L2 rs7903146 and TMEM18 rs6548238, emerged as the major SNPs contributing to BMI linked obesity risk in the North Indian population.
Obesity-associated cis-acting elements in non-coding region of FTO regulate the expression of IRX3 gene, thus activating obesity networks.
Considering the properties of the substructure and their biological functions, we identified the putative diagnostic biomarker microRNAs, some of which have been reported on the PubMed citations while the rest, that is, miR-204-5p, miR-567, miR-454-3p, miR-338-3p, and miR-139-5p, were predicted as the putative novel microRNA biomarker for the diagnosis of NSCLC adenocarcinoma.
We demonstrated that Hsa-miR-567 expression is significantly downregulated in poor prognosis breast cancer, compared to better prognosis breast cancer, having a role in the control of cell proliferation and migration by regulating KPNA4 gene.
In this study, based on our previously published in silico results, we proved both in vitro (cell line studies) and ex vivo (clinical studies), that Hsa-miR-567 expression is significantly downregulated in breast cancer with poor prognosis when compared to breast cancer with better prognosis.
More intriguingly, we demonstrated that the ectopic expression of Hsa-miR-567 in poor prognosis breast cancer cell line strongly inhibits in vitro cell proliferation and migration.
Furthermore, we showed in vivo that breast cancer cells, stably expressing Hsa-miR-567, xenografted in mouse, reduce tumor growth ability.
Consistently, we found that karyopherin 4 (KPNA4), predicted target gene of Hsa-miR-567 as identified by our in silico analysis, is upregulated in highly aggressive MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cell line and patient tissues with poor prognosis with respect to good prognosis.
The three-MUC diagnostic model (MUC3, MUC5AC, and MUC6) showed an excellent ability to discriminate pancreatic cancer from non-malignant tissues, and yielded information that may prove useful for the development of clinical applications.
Recent studies of cancer have identified novel functions of the low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 4-muscle-specific kinase (LRP4-MuSK) pathway.
Genes potentially associated with deregulation of the extracellular matrix organization pathway (CTSB, TNXB, COL4A3, COL16A1, COL24A1, COL5A2, NID1, LOXL2, MMP11, TRIM24 and MUSK) and DNA repair function (NBN and MSH2) were detected by WES, suggesting that other cancer-associated genes have pathogenic effects in the risk of familial PTC development.
Using SVM analysis and five gene expression profile data confirmation, a 15-gene signature (HES5, ZNF417, GLRA2, OR8D2, HOXA7, FABP6, MUSK, HTR6, GRIP2, KLRK1, VEGFA, AKAP12, RHEB, NCRNA00152 and PMEPA1) were identified as a predictor of recurrence risk and prognosis for colon cancer patients.
In addition, the tumor cells were positive for Calretinin, Creatine Kinase (CK)5/6, CK7, CKAEI 1/3, Wilms Tumor protein (WT-1), and Vimentin, but were negative for Alpha Feto protein (AFP), Thrombotic Thrombocytopenic Purpura (TTP-1), Anti-Hepatocyte Specific Antigen (HSA), Synaptophysin, CK20, and Homeobox protein (CDx-2).
Furthermore WT1 is a good marker of response to JAK2 inhibitors especially for patients without blasts and for patients who develop anemia or thrombocytopenia not for progression but as therapy related toxicity.
Furthermore, we detect functionally defective LRFN2 missense mutations in autism and schizophrenia patients.
Gain-of-function (GOF) mutations in RHBDF2 cause tylosis.
The curly bare mouse model of tylosis, carrying a GOF mutation in the Rhbdf2 gene (Rhbdf2 cub ), presents with epidermal hyperplasia and shows accelerated cutaneous wound-healing phenotype through enhanced secretion of the epidermal growth factor receptor family ligand amphiregulin.
iRhom2, a member of the rhomboid-like pseudoprotease superfamily, regulates the maturation and trafficking of ADAM17 and is associated with inflammatory arthritis.
In humans, gain-of-function (GOF) mutations in RHBDF2 cause the skin disease tylosis.
We generated a mouse model of human tylosis and show that GOF mutations in RHBDF2 cause tylosis by enhancing the amount of amphiregulin (AREG) secretion.
Collectively, our data suggest that RHBDF2 plays a critical role in regulating EGFR signaling and its downstream events, including development of tylosis, by facilitating enhanced secretion of AREG.
Mutations in RHBDF2 cause tylosis, a very rare disorder characterized by high life-time risk of ESCC, but no other well-established predisposition genes have been identified.
Gain-of-function mutations in iRHOM2 underlie Tylosis with oesophageal cancer (TOC), characterized by palmoplantar thickening, upregulate K16 with robust downregulation of its type II keratin binding partner, K6.
A short-lived membrane protein IRHOM2 pedals a cascade of events by regulating Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) signalling in parallel with metalloproteases which results their involvement in cancer as well as in rheumatoid arthritis.
Cells from patients with a dominantly inherited cancer susceptibility syndrome called tylosis with esophageal cancer (TOC) have amino-terminal mutations in iRhom2.
A diagnosis of tylosis with oesophageal cancer is made on the basis of a positive family history, characteristic clinical features, including cutaneous and oesophageal lesions, and genetic analysis for mutations in RHBDF2.
To investigate the content of serum microRNA-126 (miR-126) and its role in screening retinal endothelial injury and early diagnosis of proliferative diabetic retinopathy.
Let-7d, miR-21, miR-107, miR-126, miR-145, miR-146a, miR-182, and miR-192 significantly increased at the Rp-60 (control versus sham P &lt; .001).
We characterized the retinal vascular phenotype of miR-126-/- mice, and tested the function of miR-126 strands (miR-126-3p and -5p) using in vitro angiogenesis models and a mouse model of neovascular age-related macular degeneration.
Mutations in Eyes shut homolog (EYS) are one of the most common causes of autosomal recessive (ar) retinitis pigmentosa (RP), a progressive blinding disorder.
We compare the choroidal vascular area between Bietti crystalline dystrophy (BCD) patients with CYP4V2 mutations, retinitis pigmentosa (RP) patients with EYS mutations, and normal controls, and investigate the correlation between choroidal vascular area and associated parameters.
Mutations in the EYS (eyes shut homolog) gene are a common cause of autosomal recessive (ar) retinitis pigmentosa (RP).
Without a mammalian model of human EYS disease, there is limited understanding of details of disease expression and rates of progression of the retinal degeneration.
EYS and USH2A are the most common causative genes for retinitis pigmentosa (RP) in Japan.
Mutations in EYS are associated with autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa (arRP) and autosomal recessive cone-rod dystrophy (arCRD) however, the function of EYS and the molecular mechanisms of how these mutations cause retinal degeneration are still unclear.
We constructed an EYS-knockout zebrafish-line by TALEN technology which showed visual impairment at an early age, while the histological and immunofluorescence assays indicated the presence of progressive retinal degeneration with a cone predominately affected pattern.
Mutations in the extracellular matrix protein eyes shut homolog (EYS) cause photoreceptor degeneration in patients with retinitis pigmentosa 25 (RP25).
Idiopathic myelofibrosis is a chronic myeloproliferative disorder in which the characteristic fibroblast proliferation is thought to be a secondary phenomenon resulting from the inappropriate release of megakaryocyte- and/or monocyte-derived growth factors, including PDGF, TGF-beta, bFGF and calmodulin.
The urinary concentration of calmodulin and basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) was determined in a total of 53 patients with various chronic myeloproliferative disorders (CMPD), including 22 patients with idiopathic myelofibrosis (IMF).
Calmodulin excretion was significantly elevated in IMF (0.29 +/- 0.04 microgram/mmol creatinine) (P &lt; 0.001), when compared to polycythaemia vera (PV) (0.14 +/- 0.02), essential thrombocythaemia (ET) (0.13 +/- 0.04), chronic myeloid leukaemia (CML) (0.16 +/- 0.02), unclassified myeloproliferative disorders (UMPD) (0.11 +/- 0.02) and age-matched controls (0.1 +/- 0.02) (P &lt; 0.001).
The proteins are 1) aM, a mutant CaM in which domain I has been deleted; 2) TaM, first domain of cTnC, last three domains of CaM; 3) TaM-BMI, same as TaM, except the nonfunctional first Ca2(+)-binding domain has been restored by mutagenesis; 4) CaT, first domain of CaM, last three domains of cTnC.
The kinetics of activation of PDE by CaM, TaM, and TaM-BMI were identical.
In addition, TaM-BMI was a potent competitive inhibitor of MLCK activation by CaM (Ki = 66 nM).
We conclude 1) a domain I is necessary to activate these target enzymes, and the substitution of the corresponding region of cTnC into CaM leads to differential effects; 2) an active first Ca2(+)-binding site is not essential for activation of PDE and the primary sequence of the first domain of CaM need not be highly conserved; 3) for CaM kinase II, determinants in the first domain are critical whereas more flexibility exists for the remaining three domains; 4) since TaM-BMI acts as a potent competitive inhibitor of MLCK binding of CaM to a target enzyme and activation can be dissociable events.
However, a specific electrostatic interaction between R812 of MLCK and CaM is suggested by the complete failure in MLCK activation if this residue is changed to an A. Electrostatic interactions between MLCK and CaM are also indicated by the TaM-BM1 mutant.
The resulting MLCK-CaM complex is therefore, inactive but can bind TaM-BM1.
TaM-BMI is a genetically engineered chimeric protein consisting of the first 55 amino acids of cardiac troponin C (but with the normally inactive first Ca2+ binding domain reactivated by site- directed mutagenesis) ligated to the last three domains of chicken calmodulin (George, S.E., VanBerkum, M.F., Ono, T., Cook, R., Hanley, R.M., Putkey, J.A., and Means, A. R. (1990) J. Biol.
Alterations of three amino acids predicted to lie on the external surface of calmodulin (E14A, T34K, S38M) recapitulated the phenotype of TaM-BMI and exhibited a Ki of 38 nM.
Both the triple mutant and TaM-BMI activated phosphodiesterase and bound a synthetic peptide analog of the calmodulin binding region of smMLCK with an affinity similar to that of native calmodulin (Kact and Kd values of approximately 2 and 3 nM respectively).
When a synthetic peptide analog of the myosin light chain phosphorylation site was used as substrate rather than the 20-kDa light chains, TaM-BMI and the triple mutant were partial agonists: the Km for peptide substrate was increased 100- and 60-fold, and catalytic activity was 45 and 60%, respectively, relative to calmodulin.
These data suggest TaM-BMI and E14A/T34K/S38M may interact with the calmodulin binding domain of smMLCK in a manner similar to calmodulin.
Recently mitoNEET has been shown to be a major role player in the mitochondrial function associated with metabolic type diseases such as obesity and cancers.
To investigate CISD1 mRNA and protein in human adipose tissue in association with obesity and adipogenesis.
SAT and VAT CISD1 mRNA and protein levels were significantly decreased in subjects with obesity and negatively correlated with BMI after controlling for age and sex.
In participants with morbid obesity, VAT CISD1 gene expression was positively correlated with insulin sensitivity (r = 0.47, P = 0.01), and bariatric surgery-induced weight loss led to increased SAT CISD1 mRNA levels.
These data suggest a possible role of CISD1 in obesity-associated dysfunctional adipogenesis in human VAT.
DNA = deoxyribonucleic acid; CRC = colorectal cancer; EU = European Union; WHO = World Health Organization; FOBT = fecal occult blood test; CBMN = cytokinesis-blocked micronucleus assay; MN = micronuclei; NPB = nucleoplasmic bridges; NDI = Nuclear Division Index; FAP = familial adenomatous polyposis; HNPCC = hereditary non-polypoid colorectal cancer; IBD = inflammatory bowel diseases; ROC = receiver operating characteristics; AUROC = area under the receiver operating characteristics curve.
Clinical comparison of our patient with those previously reported with overlapping 11q duplications allows us to define the minimal duplicated region associated with craniosynostosis and strongly supports the hypothesis that the constitutional increased dosage of the FGF3 and FGF4 genes is a risk factor for craniosynostosis in humans.
Excitatory GABA actions, induced by altered expression of chloride transporters (KCC2/NKCC1), can contribute to seizure generation in temporal lobe epilepsy.
Alterations in the balance of K-Na-2Cl cotransporter (NKCC1) and Na-Cl cotransporter (KCC2) activity may cause depolarizing effect of Gamma-aminobutyric Acid (GABA), and contribute to epileptogenesis in human temporal lobe epilepsy.
In the current pilot study we provide the first documented look at efficacy of bumetanide, a specific NKCC1 antagonist, on reduction of seizure frequency in adult patients with temporal lobe epilepsy.
Aim of the present research work was to study the relationship between the degree of dementia and the serum levels of homocysteine(Hcy), high-sensitive C-reactive protein(hs-CRP), D-Dimer and vascular dementia(VaD) of patients, and to investigate the mechanism of Hcy, hs-CRP and D-Dimer in the vascular dementia.
Hcy, hs-CRP and D-Dimer are involved in the pathogenesis of vascular dementia (VAD), There is a significant correlation between the severity of vascular dementia and Hcy and Hs-CRP.
In 205 patients with dementia [89 with Alzheimer's disease (AD), 47 with vascular dementia (VaD), 69 with mixed dementia (MD)], 113 persons with mild cognitive impairment and in 107 controls serum adiponectin, leptin and resistin levels, pro-inflammatory [interleukin-6 (IL-6), C-reactive protein (hsCRP) and chitotriosidase] and anti-inflammatory (25-OH vitamin D, HDL-cholesterol and paraoxonase 1) markers, as well as glucose metabolism parameters (glucose, insulin and HOMA-IR) were determined.
After adjusting for possible confounding cardiovascular risk factors, high CRP was independently associated with vascular dementia but not Alzheimer disease.
In this prospective study of an elderly Asian community cohort with more than 10 years of follow-up, the baseline serum CRP level was associated with future development of vascular dementia, but not Alzheimer disease after adjusting for common cardiovascular risk factors, stroke, and competing risk of death.
Hypersensitive C-reaction protein (hsCRP) may be a risk factor for cognitive impairment resulting from Alzheimer's disease (AD), stroke, and vascular dementia.
The following markers of inflammation: enzymatic activity of leukocyte elastase (LE), functional activity of alpha-1-proteinase inhibitor (Alfa1-PI), levels of C-reactive protein (CRP) and interleukin-6 (IL-6) were measured in the blood plasma of patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD) and vascular dementia (VD).
Lichenoid dermatitis and bullous pemphigoid appear to be DT more associated with anti-PD-1/PD-L1 antibody.
We have previously demonstrated that Bmi1 is upregulated in HCC with bile duct tumor thrombi, a subtype of HCC characterized by profuse expression of hepatic stem cell markers.
BMI1 is a core component of the polycomb repressive complex 1 (PRC1) and is up-regulated in biliary tract cancer (BTC), contributing to aggressive clinical features.
In this study we investigated the cytotoxic effects of PTC-209, a recently developed inhibitor of BMI1, in BTC cells.
The expression of Bmi1 was examined immunohistochemically in HCC patients with BDTT (B+ group), HCC patients with vascular invasion (V+ group) and combined hepatocellular carcinoma and cholangiocarcinoma (C+ group), respectively.
Relative risk of gallbladder cancer per unit increment of z-score adjusted for age, smoking status and BMI (except for BMI itself) and stratified by birth year, sex and sub-cohorts, was for BMI 1.31 (95% confidence interval 1.11, 1.57) and blood glucose 1.76 (1.10, 2.85).
Normal, prostatitis, and prostate cancer specimens were retrospectively selected and examined by immunohistochemistry for PEDF expression and infiltration of immune CD68 + macrophagic cells.
Mice deficient in RORbeta develop retinal degeneration that results in blindness.
To compare the prevalence of dental caries in children with cleft lip/palate with national data at the same age.
Children with a cleft lip/palate have higher levels of dental caries compared to those with a cleft lip alone; 2.
We investigate the following key questions: (1) Does laboratory induced exposure to thin ideals (waiting room design) relate to impairments in terms of body image, affect and eating behavior and biological stress response (salivary alpha-amylase, salivary cortisol, heart rate and heart rate variability) in 18 to 35 year old female suffering from anorexia and bulimia nervosa (AN, BN) compared to female healthy controls and to a sample of females suffering from mixed mental disorders (depression, anxiety and somatic symptom disorder (SSD) disorders)?
Mutations in OCRL1 cause the X-linked Dent disease type 2 (DD2; OMIM# 300555), characterized by low-molecular weight proteinuria, hypercalciuria, and the variable presence of cataracts, glaucoma and intellectual disability without structural brain anomalies.
Oculocerebrorenal syndrome of Lowe (OCRL, OMIM 309000), also known as Lowe syndrome, is a rare X-linked multisystem disorder characterized by congenital cataracts, mental retardation, and Fanconi syndrome of the kidney proximal tubules.
Mutations in OCRL, an inositol polyphosphate 5-phosphatase, result in Oculocerebrorenal syndrome of Lowe, an X-linked recessive disorder that presents with congenital cataracts, glaucoma, renal dysfunction and mental retardation.
One patient had chronic alcoholism, the other porphyria variegata; both initially presented with water-and-electrolyte disorders, notably hyponatraemia.
We investigated the associations of Delta-6-desaturase (D6D) and Delta-5-desaturase (D5D) activities with stroke risk factors and risk of stroke among 1842 men from the prospective, population-based Kuopio Ischaemic Heart Disease Risk Factor Study, aged 42-60 years and free of CVD at baseline in 1984-1989.
Neither D6D activity (multivariable-adjusted extreme-quartile hazard ratios (HR) 1*18; 95 % CI 0*80, 1*74) nor D5D activity (HR 1*06; 95 % CI 0*70, 1*60) were associated with stroke risk.
In conclusion, higher D5D activity was favourably associated and higher D6D activity unfavourably associated with several stroke risk factors, but not with the risk of incident stroke.
Present findings suggested that high serum 22:6n-3 and D5D as well as low 16:0, 16:1n-7 and D6D were associated with a low prevalence of hypertension in this Chinese population.
Pancreatic adenocarcinoma tissues obtained from 104 patients were subjected to cytokeratin 19 and CD31 double immunostaining to identify cancer cells and endothelial cells simultaneously.
Using BM chimera, we found that serpinB1 deficiency in BM cells was necessary and sufficient to reproduce the BM neutropenia of sB1(-/-) mice.
Moreover, we showed that genetic deletion of CG, but not NE, fully rescued the BM neutropenia in sB1(-/-) mice.
In fact, depletion of the endoplasmic reticulum from calcium induces metabolic changes resembling, in many respects, those produced by transient cerebral ischemia: it causes an inhibition of the activity of the eucaryotic initiation factor elF-2 alpha (by phosphorylation), a disaggregation of polyribosomes and thus an inhibition of global protein synthesis, and an increased expression of certain genes such as transcription factors (c-fos and c-jun) and the glucose-related protein grp78.
TGH rabbits showed advanced aortic atherosclerosis, accompanied by intimal thickening of coronary and renal arteries, fatty liver changes, and xanthoma.
The study group comprised 39 men and 3 women (42 and 3 CAS procedures, respectively) with severe carotid stenosis (average age 70.0 +/- 6.6 years).
Evidence has indicated that the protein and mRNA levels of serine-arginine protein kinase-1 (SRPK-1) are upregulated in NSCLC tissues.
However, the functions of SRPK1 and targeted therapy for SRPK1 in the progression and treatment of NSCLC remain to be fully elucidated.
In the present study, the mRNA and protein expression levels of SRPK-1 in NSCLC cells and tissues were analyzed using reverse transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction analysis and SDS-PAGE, and the role of SRPK1 in the progression of NSCLC was investigated.
The curative effects of ChanSRPK-1 on the inhibition of growth, migration and invasion of NSCLC were also examined in vitro and in vivo.
The results revealed that the mRNA and protein levels of SRPK-1 were upregulated in NSCLC cells and tumor tissues.
Higher expression of SRPK1 promoted NSCLC cell growth, migration and invasion, whereas lower expression of SRPK-1 suppressed growth, migration and invasion of the NSCLC cells.
Taken together, SRPK-1 may offer potential as a therapeutic target oncogenic molecular in NSCLC, and ChanSRPK-1 may be a therapeutic agent with functions as a target and for oncolytic therapy in the treatment of NSCLC.
A recent report adds to this puzzle, showing that the main effect of SRPK1 overexpression in non-small-cell lung carcinoma is to stimulate a stem cell-like phenotype.
SRPK1 was associated with the clinical features of human NSCLC, including clinical stage (p &lt; 0.001) and T (p = 0.001), N (p = 0.007), and M (p = 0.001) classifications.
Ectopic overexpression of SRPK1 promoted the acquisition of a stem cell-like phenotype in human NSCLC cell lines cultured in vitro.
Mouse studies indicated that SRPK1 promoted NSCLC cell line tumour growth and SRPK1 overexpression reduced the number of tumour cells required to initiate tumourigenesis in vivo.
Mechanistically, gene set enrichment analysis showed that Wnt/Beta-catenin signalling correlated with SRPK1 mRNA levels and this signalling pathway was hyperactivated by ectopic SRPK1 expression in NSCLC cell lines.
Immunofluorescence demonstrated that SRPK1 enhanced Beta-catenin accumulation in the nuclei of NSCLC cell lines, and inhibition of Beta-catenin signalling abrogated the SRPK1-induced stem cell-like phenotype.
Together, our findings suggest that SRPK1 promotes a stem cell-like phenotype in NSCLC via Wnt/Beta-catenin signalling.
Moreover, SRPK1 may represent a novel target for human NSCLC diagnosis and therapy.
Dys-regulation of serine-arginine protein kinase 1 (SRPK1) has been reported in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
In this study, the expression of SRPK1 in NSCLC tissues was determined using real-time PCR, and the roles of SRPK1 in the progression of NSCLC were investigated.
It was found that both the mRNA level and the protein level of SRPK1 were up-regulated in NSCLC tissues.
Forced expression of SRPK1 promoted the growth and migration of NSCLC cells, while knocking down the expression of SRPK1 inhibited the growth, migration, and tumorigenicity of NSCLC cells.
Taken together, SRPK1 might play an oncogenic role in NSCLC, and SRPK1 might be a therapeutic target for NSCLC.
We report the case of a woman with an early-onset endometrial adenocarcinoma who was suspected to be affected with Lynch syndrome based on tumor dMMR phenotype (MSI associated with loss of expression of MSH2 and MSH6 proteins).
The patient had intellectual disability and presented with a prostatic adenocarcinoma with an incidentally identified synchronous sigmoid adenocarcinoma that exhibited deficient MMR with an absence of MSH2 and MSH6 protein expression.
Relative to YAs, OAs were characterised by smaller muscle volume, greater IMAT volume, lower muscle strength, and higher levels of myeloperoxidase, P-selectin, soluble intercellular adhesion molecule 1, and vascular cell adhesion molecule 1.
Cloning and characterization of ADMP has made it feasible to determine its prospective role in the absence of androgens in prostate cancer.
47, XXY Klinefelter syndrome; (2) more frequently postzygotic mosaicism for IKBKG mutation.2 Detection of postzygotic mosaicism is dependant of tissue sampling localization and percentage of mutated cells in the sample.
A higher M-protein level was evidenced at 10w and 4 mice developed paraplegia at 8/9w in low-Ca-MM group only.
In contrast, the expression level of the proteins did not show a significant change at 9 weeks, but this increased to 3-fold at 30 weeks for carbonic anhydrase VII, ras related protein Rab 6, Annexin A2, neurofibromatosis type 2 and aldehyde dehydrogenase.
Clinical data were collected and analyzed from 71 cases of primary nephrotic syndrome with glucocorticoid-induced ocular hypertension, glaucoma or cataract from Jun.
c-Jun, c-Jun N-terminal kinase(JNK) and endothelin B (ETB) receptor have been shown to contribute to the pathogenesis of glaucoma.
JUN is expressed after glaucoma-relevant injuries and Jun deficiency protects RGCs after mechanical injury to the optic nerve.
JUN was expressed in a temporal and spatial pattern consistent with a role in glaucomatous injury.
Jun deficiency protected RGC somas from ocular hypertensive injury, but did not protect RGC axons from glaucomatous neurodegeneration.
Jun is a major regulator of RGC somal degeneration after glaucomatous ocular hypertensive injury.
These results suggest in glaucomatous neurodegeneration, JNK-JUN signaling has a major role as a pro-death signaling pathway between axonal injury and somal degeneration.
To test performance, computer-derived outputs were compared to previously published features of several well-characterized mouse models of ophthalmic disease and their controls: normal C57BL/6J mice; Jun-sufficient and Jun-deficient mice subjected to controlled optic nerve crush (CONC); and DBA/2J mice with naturally occurring glaucoma.
Automated characterization of C57BL/6J retinas predicted 54,642 RGCs per normal retina, and identified a 48.3% Jun-dependent loss of cells at 35 days post CONC and a 71.2% loss of RGCs among 16-month-old DBA/2J mice with glaucoma.
This study evaluates, for we believe the first time, polymorphisms on the SNARE complex-related genes STX1A (rs2228607), VAMP2 (26bp Ins/Del) and SYT1 (rs1880867 and rs2251214) on the response to immediate-release methylphenidate (IR-MPH) in a naturalistic sample of adults with ADHD.
We tested the association between ADHD and polymorphisms on the SNARE genes STX1A (rs2228607), SYT1 (rs1880867 and rs2251214), VAMP2 (26bp Ins/Del) and SNAP25 (rs6108461 and rs8636) on a sample comprised of 548 adults with ADHD and 644 non-affected controls.
We genotyped eight single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) of Syntaxin 1A (STX1A), vesicle-associated membrane protein 2 (VAMP2) and synaptosomal-associated protein 25 kDa (SNAP25) and conducted case-control studies in 1404 male ADHD and 617 male controls.
In this study; it was aimed to investigate the association of the synaptobrevin-2 (VAMP-2) gene Ins/Del polymorphism and syntaxin 1A gene intron 7 polymorphism, which take place in encoding presynaptic protein, with adult ADHD.
A significant difference was determined between ADHD and VAMP-2 Ins/Del polymorphism and syntaxin 1A intron 7 polymorphism according to the control group.
We sequenced genes coding for components of the SNARE complex (STX1A, VAMP2, SNAP25) and their regulatory proteins (STXBP1/Munc18-1, SYT1), which are essential for neurotransmission, in 95 patients with idiopathic mental retardation.
This was substantiated by the cellular co-localization of B1R with NOX1 and NOX2 and opens the possibility that B1R-enhanced oxidative stress is derived from vascular and infiltrating immune cells in diabetes.
The degree of adiposity, insulin resistance, and dyslipidemia in KW mice was not influenced by Nox1 deletion as determined by nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, glucose tolerance tests, and plasma analyses.
Foram avaliados 25 pacientes com diagnostico de DPOC, classificados de acordo com criterios da Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease, e 25 individuos saudaveis.
The present study examined the involvement of Shh signaling on the disruption of hippocampal neurogenesis in rats with hypothyroidism.
Developmental hypothyroidism increased Shh(+) neurons bilaterally and abolished the asymmetric distribution pattern on PND 21.
Adult hypothyroidism also disrupted the asymmetric distribution of Mid1(+) cells but did not affect the distribution of Shh(+) hilar neurons.
The results suggest that the hippocampal neurogenesis disruption seen in hypothyroidism involves changes in asymmetric Shh(+) neuron distribution in developmental hypothyroidism and altered Mid1 expression in both developmental and adult-stage hypothyroidism.
Moreover, maternal hypothyroxinemia and hypothyroidism reduced expression of the Shh signaling pathway on PN7, PN14, and PN21.
Our study supports the hypothesis that developmental hypothyroxinemia induced by mild ID, and hypothyroidism induced by severe ID or MMZ, reduce the proliferation of CGNPs, which may be ascribed to the downregulation of the Shh signaling pathway.
Taken together, these results suggest that Shh expression is related to the morphological cerebellar changes in experimental hypothyroidism and that sustained signaling by Shh may play a key role in normal development, particularly lobulation, in the cerebellum.
Common congenital anomalies associated with SMMCI are: severe to mild intellectual disability, congenital heart disease, cleft lip and/or palate and less frequently, microcephaly, hypopituitarism, hypotelorism, convergent strabismus, oesophageal and duodenal atresia, cervical hemivertebrae, cervical dermoid, hypothyroidism, scoliosis, absent kidney, micropenis and ambiguous genitalia.
In comparison with normal DNA, tumour DNA of a total of eight patients (seven with germ cell neoplasm and one with testicular lymphoma) showed increased dosages of KRAS2, PDGFA, EGFR, MET and PDGFB.
We have in previous studies found higher CSF concentrations of interleukin-8 (IL-8), monocyte chemoattractant protein 1 (MCP-1/CCL-2), chitinase-3-like protein 1 (CHI3L1/YKL-40), and neurofilament light chain (NF-L) in euthymic patients with bipolar disorder compared with controls.
CSF levels of tryptophan (TRP), KYNA, quinolinic acid (QUIN), interleukin (IL)-6, IL-8 and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-Alfa) were analyzed in 23 twins with schizophrenia or bipolar disorder, and in their not affected co-twins.
However, the functional role of CTHRC1 and its related mechanism in breast cancer still remains unclear.
CTHRC1 expressions in breast cancer tissues and cells were assessed by qRT-PCR, western blot and immunohistochemistry.
We found CTHRC1 was frequently up-regulated in human breast cancer cells and tissues.
Then our cohort study and further meta-analysis validated high expression of CTHRC1 was associated with aggressive clinicopathological features and poor clinical outcome of breast cancer patients.
In addition, CTHRC1 promoted cell proliferation, invasion and migration and suppressed cell apoptosis in breast cancer, which might be by activating GSK-3Beta/Beta-catenin signaling and inhibiting Bax/Caspase-9/Caspase-3 signaling respectively; and these biological functions of CTHRC1 could be directly negatively regulated by miR-30c.
Taken together, we identified the role of miR-30c/CTHRC1 axis in breast cancer progression and demonstrated CTHRC1 may serve as a prognostic biomarker and therapeutic target for breast cancer.
Collagen triple helix repeat containing 1 (CTHRC1) was identified as a novel gene expressed in the adventitia and neointima on arterial injury and was found to be overexpressed in several malignant tumors, such as breast cancer and malignant melanoma.
The aim of this research was to clarify the clinicopathologic significance of CTHRC1 expression in human breast cancer.
22 cases of breast cancer tissues, randomly selected from clinically diagnosed patients, showed a significant increase of CTHRC1 mRNA expression compared to the normal tissue from the same patients using RT-PCR and real-time PCR.
A high level of CTHRC1 expression was observed in 111 (58.7 %) out of 189 breast cancer patients and the expression was significantly correlated with histologic grade (P = 0.026), nodal status (P &lt; 0.001), and TNM pathologic stage (P = 0.002).
Taken together, the results showed that CTHRC1 over-expression was significantly associated with clinicopathological factors of poor prognosis in invasive ductal carcinoma.
CTHRC1 could be used as a supplementary prognostic biomarker and a potential therapeutic target in breast cancer.
CTHRC1 has recently been shown to be expressed in human cancers such as breast cancer and melanoma.
CTHRC1 has not been studied in breast cancer by immunohistochemistry.
To examine expression of CTHRC1 together with periostin and versican in breast cancer patients and investigate its association with clinicopathological characteristics.
Expression of CTHRC1, versican and periostin was significantly higher in breast cancer than in normal tissue or precursor lesions.
CTHRC1 and periostin play important roles in breast cancer progression.
These preliminary results show that combined evaluation of CTHRC1 and periostin could serve as a potential marker for breast cancer bone metastasis; the other observations contribute to the description of the tumour microenvironment, with implications for lymph node and bone metastasis.
Cthrc1 has also been shown to be highly active and potent in degrading extracellular matrix proteins and was found to be overexpressed in several malignant tumours, such as breast cancer and malignant melanoma.
Replication extended to the following polymorphisms: PKN2 (rs305217), GTF2B (rs7538427), EPHA4 (rs1517440), YTHDF3 (rs12115114), ANKFN1 (rs17758761) and PTPRM (rs4798571), which did not reach the threshold of significance in a follow-up of the first genome-wide association study (GWAS) conducted in multiple sclerosis; TMEM39A (rs1132200), which appeared as a newly identified susceptibility gene in the same study; a gene previously reaching GWAS significance in Italy, CBLB (rs9657904); IL12B (rs6887695, rs10045431), a susceptibility gene shared by diverse autoimmune diseases and, finally, another gene showing inconclusive association with multiple sclerosis, CNR1 (rs1049353).
In conclusion, our present study showed that MAGE-C1/CT7, SSX1, SSX2 and SSX4 were co-expressed in MM cell lines and the primary myeloma cells in MM patients, but not expressed in BM cells of healthy subjects.
Using the current tissue collection and 5-fold cross validation, the four most significant loci (CDKN2A EX2, CDX2, HOXA1 and OPCML) individually distinguish lung adenocarcinoma from non-cancer lung with a sensitivity of 67-86% and specificity of 74-82%.
The four most highly ranked loci, CDKN2A EX2, CDX2, HOXA1 and OPCML, which show significant DNA methylation even in stage IA tumor samples, merit further investigation as some of the most promising lung adenocarcinoma markers identified to date.
We used a range of approaches for the treatment of 123 patients with chronic cholecystitis and concomitant gallbladder dysfunction plus opisthorchiasis including extremely high-frequency electromagnetic irradiation (EHF therapy) in the combination with the oral intake of the choleretic herbal remedies followed by the transverse galvanization of the epigastric region with due regard for the phase of the rhythm of the functional activity of the gallbladder.
It guarantees (is a predictor) receiving of high therapeutic effect (Percent Concordant of = 86.4%; the standardized coefficient = 2.54; r = 0.001) of the complex treatment including EHF-therapy with use of chronobiological approach to treatment of patients with chronic cholecystitis in combination with a chronic opisthorchiasis.
Abbreviations used: ACN: Acetonitrile, ANOVA: One-way analysis of variance, BrdU: Bromodeoxyuridine, 13C-NMR: Carbon-13 Nuclear magnetic resonance, CAD: Caspase-activated endonuclease, CCD-18Co: Human colon normal, DLD1: Human Duke's type C colorectal adenocarcinoma, DMRT: Duncan's multiple range test, DMSO: Dimethyl sulfoxide, DNA: Deoxyribonucleic acid, DR4/5: Death receptor 4/5 protein, EMEM: Eagle's minimum essential media, FBS: Fetal bovine serum, FITC Annexin V: Annexin V conjugated with fluorescein isothiocyanate, FITC-DEVD-FMK: Fluorescein isothiocyanate conjugate of caspase inhibitor Asp-Glu-Val-Asp-fluoromethyl ketone, FITC-IETD-FMK: Fluorescein isothiocyanate conjugate of caspase inhibitor Ile-Glu-Thr-Asp-fluoromethyl ketone, FITC-LEHD-FMK: Fluorescein isothiocyanate conjugate of caspase inhibitor Leu-Glu-His-Asp-fluoromethyl ketone, G0: Quiescent phase of cell cycle, G1: Gap 1 phase of cell cycle, G2: Gap 2 phase of cell cycle, GC-MS: Gas chromatography-mass spectrometry, HeLa: Human cervical adenocarcinoma, HPLC: High performance liquid chromatography, HT29: Human colon adenocarcinoma, Huh7.5: Human hepatocellular carcinoma, IC50: Half maximal inhibitory concentration, KSHV: Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus, M phase: Mitotic phase of cell cycle, MCF7: Human breast adenocarcinoma, NMR: Nuclear magnetic resonance, PBS: Phosphate-buffered saline, PI: Propidium iodide, RNase: Ribonuclease, rt: Retention time, S phase: Synthesis phase of cell cycle, SD: Standard deviation, SRB: Sulforhodamine B, TCA: Trichloroacetic acid, TLC: Thin layer chromatography, TNF-R1: Tumor necrosis factor receptor 1 protein, TUNEL: Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase (TdT) dUTP nick-end labeling, UV: Ultraviolet.
The compounds preferentially inhibited the proliferation of T-lymphoma CEM and Molt/4, prostate PC-3, kidney Caki-1 and hepatoma Huh-7 tumor cells, but were virtually inactive against other tumor cell lines including B-lymphoma Raji and cervix carcinoma HeLa cells.
MAN2A1-FER was also overexpressed in PC3 or DU145 (prostate cancer), NIH3T3 (fibroblast), H23 (lung cancer), and A-172 (glioblastoma multiforme) cell lines and knocked out in HUH7 (liver cancer) cells.
Embelin strongly inhibited cell growth especially in human prostate cancer cell lines, including PC3, DU145, LNCaP-LN3 and normal prostate epithelial cell, RWPE-1 compared to breast cancer (MDA-MB-231, MCF-7, and T47D), hepatoma (HepG2, Hep3B, and HuH-7), or choriocarcinoma (JEG-3).
Objective  To study the phenotype and overview the clinical management on Cleft Lip and/or Palate (CL/P) with Nevoid Basal Cell Carcinoma Syndrome (NBCCS) patients in Peking University School and Hospital of Stomatology.
Mice carrying compound mutations in hedgehog acyltransferase (Hhat) and patched1 (Ptch1) exhibited perturbations in the SHH gradient during frontonasal development, which led to hypoplastic nasal process outgrowth, epithelial seam persistence, and cleft lip.
Nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome (NBCCS) is an autosomal dominant or spontaneous disorder characterized by multiple cutaneous basal cell carcinomas, odontogenic keratocysts, skeletal anomalies and facial dysmorphology, including cleft lip and palate.
Holoprosencephaly is addressed under the following headings: alobar, semilobar, and lobar holoprosencephaly; arrhinencephaly; agenesis of the corpus callosum; pituitary abnormalities; hindbrain abnormalities; syntelencephaly; aprosencephaly/atelencephaly; neural tube defects; facial anomalies; median cleft lip; minor facial anomalies; single maxillary central incisor; holoprosencephaly-like phenotype; epidemiology; genetic causes of holoprosencephaly; teratogenic causes of holoprosencephaly; SHH mutations; ZIC2 mutations; SIX3 mutations; TGIF mutations; PTCH mutations; GLI2 mutations; FAST1 mutations; TDGF1 mutations; and DHCR7 mutations.
Markers of the different classes obtained were found associated with the two resistance loci, PcA and R-284B-2, mapped on Asw, and with five out of eight QTLs for partial resistance in the MN map.
In this study, the RGAs were mapped in two recombinant inbred line (RIL) populations that segregate for crown rust resistance: the diploid Avena strigosa x Avena wiestii RIL population (Asw), which has been used for mapping the complex locus PcA, and the hexaploid MN841801-1 x Noble-2 RIL population (MN), in which QTLs have been located.
Markers based on RGA L7M2 co-localized with markers defining the QTL Prq1a in linkage group MN3, and were located 15.2 cM from PcA in linkage group AswAC.
The SCAR marker for Pc94 was also located in the QTL Prq1a but at 39.5 cM from PcA in AswAC, indicating that the NBS-LRR sequence represented by this marker is not related to PcA.
The dissociation of the approximately 3500-kDa hexagonal bilayer (HBL) hemoglobin (Hb) of Lumbricus terrestris upon exposure to Gdm salts, urea and the heteropolytungstates [SiW11O39]8- (SiW), [NaSb9W21O86]18- (SbW) and [BaAs4W40O140]27- (AsW) at neutral pH was followed by gel filtration, SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, and scanning transmission electron microscopy.
OxyHb dissociation decreased in the order Gdm*SCN &gt; Gdm.Cl &gt; urea &gt; Gdm.OAc and AsW &gt; SbW &gt; SiW.
However, whether melatonin could exert its neuroprotective function against soluble ABeta1-42-induced neurotoxicity during AD development through regulating Reelin-Dab1 signaling remains poorly understood.
Using in vitro study, Reelin inactivation completely abolished the protective effect of melatonin against ABeta1-42-induced neurotoxicity.
Although RELN is associated with neurodevelopment and neurological diseases, it represents a previously uncharacterized target for developmental Pb neurotoxicity.
The increased risk of DCI in people with migraine with aura is because migraine with aura is also associated with right-to-left shunts and this increased risk of DCI appears to be confi ned to those with a large PFO or other large shunt.
As opposed to patients with thrombotic disease and migraine, divers can choose to reduce DCI risk.
We conducted a multicenter randomized, placebo-controlled double-blind parallel-group study in Japanese Parkinson's disease (PD) patients with wearing-off motor fluctuations to determine the clinical efficacy and safety of entacapone as an adjunct to concomitant treatment with levodopa and a dopa decarboxylase inhibitor (DCI).
In the treatment of Parkinson's disease, levodopa, DCI, MAO-B inhibitor, COMT inhibitors, dopamine receptor agonists, amantadine, anticholinergics have been applied and new drugs are being developed.
High ADAMTS-7 levels are associated with acute myocardial infarction (AMI), although its involvement in ventricular remodeling is unclear.
The study aimed to examine plasma ADAMTS-7 levels in patients with acute myocardial infarction (AMI) and the relationship between plasma ADAMTS-7 levels and heart function.
In order to investigate the interaction between the cytokines and keratinocyte and determine the role of cytokines in hyperproliferative of chronic otitis media with cholesteatoma, we observe the expression of matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP9), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), keratinocyte growth factor (KGF) and its receptor (KGFR) in middle ear cholesteatoma.
We examined the expression of MMP9, VEGF, KGF, KGFR and Ki-67 by immunohistochemistry in 50 specimens from chronic otitis media with cholesteatoma and 15 specimens from the normal skin of external auditory meatus.
The present study was performed to investigate the expressions of transforming growth factor Beta1 (TGF-Beta1) and matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) in an experimental model of tympanosclerosis and their possible roles in the formation of this disorder.
Our data indicate that, for the first time, the alteration in expressions of TGF-Beta1 and MMP-9 were involved in the formation of tympanosclerosis, which may represent an important mechanism underlying the pathogenesis of tympanosclerosis.
LTA increased the activity of MMP-9, not TIMPs in middle ear epithelia, suggesting that disturbed balance between MMP-9 and TIMPs could play an active role in LTA-induced otitis media.
To evaluate the role of MMP-9 and MMP-2 in pediatric patients with middle ear effusion (MEE) and determine the pathogenesis of otitis media with effusion (OME) and allergy.
A new study reports that loss of solute carrier family 13 member 5, which transports citrate across cell membranes, halts liver cancer cell growth by altering both energy production and mammalian target of rapamycin signaling in human liver cancer cell lines and in both an in vitro and in vivo model of liver tumors, suggesting a new target for liver cancer chemoprevention and/or chemotherapy.
However, despite the emerging importance of SLC13A5 in energy homeostasis, whether perturbation of SLC13A5 affects the metabolism and malignancy of hepatocellular carcinoma is unknown.
Together, our findings expand the role of SLC13A5 from facilitating hepatic energy homeostasis to influencing hepatoma cell proliferation and suggest a potential role of SLC13A5 in the progression of human hepatocellular carcinoma.
We applied the MINDy (Modulator Inference by Network Dynamics) algorithm to four TFs (ESR1, FOXA1, GATA3 and SPDEF) that are key drivers of estrogen receptor-positive (ER+) breast cancer risk, as well as cancer progression.
In female patients with locally advanced breast cancer (labc) and good response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy (nact), including endocrine therapy, what is the role of breast-conserving surgery (bcs) compared with mastectomy?In female patients with labc, is radiotherapy (rt) indicated for those who have undergone mastectomy?does locoregional rt, compared with breast or chest wall rt alone, result in a higher survival rate and lower recurrence rates?is rt indicated for those achieving a pathologic complete response (pcr) to nact?In female patients with labc who receive nact, is the most appropriate axillary staging procedure sentinel lymph node biopsy (slnb) or axillary dissection?
y 1 namyNeHTKN c BKN, BblRBneHHblM Ha cpoKe bepeMeHHocTN 11 HeA, B cBR3N c HapacTaHNeM myNToneHNN npoBeAeHa TepanNR NHTepoepoHoM-Alfa co II TpNMecTpa bepeMeHHocTN, c nocneAyhweN TepanNeN KnaApNbNHoM nocne poAoB.
There also is evidence of altered expression of peptides associated with inflammation in mood disorder patients, encouraging experimental treatment with anti-inflammatory agents; of these, the COX-II inhibitor celecoxib has shown some evidence of benefit.
After serological and medical examinations, individuals were separated into the following groups: Chagas' disease patients without manifest cardiac involvement (CDP-0), CDP with suspected or borderline cardiac disease (CDP-1), CDP with moderate myocardial dysfunction (CDP-2), CDP with overt cardiac dysfunction (CDP-3) and controls including healthy subjects (HS) and patients with idiopathic myocarditis (IMP).
In the present study, immunohistochemical staining revealed that the expression of TRIM16 was decreased in prostate adenocarcinoma compared with that in normal prostate tissues.
Western blot analysis showed that TRIM16 was downregulated in distant metastatic cancer tissues compared with that in non-distant metastatic cancer tissues.
The overexpression of TRIM16 inhibited the migration and invasion of prostate cancer cells as well as inhibiting the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition process, whereas TRIM16 depletion enhanced these processes.
Taken together, these findings suggest that TRIM16 may be an important molecular target which may aid in the design of novel therapeutic agents for prostate cancer.
However, the role of TRIM16 in ovarian cancer has never been revealed.
Thus, in this study, we investigated the roles and mechanisms of TRIM16 in ovarian cancer.
Our results demonstrated that TRIM16 expression was low in ovarian cancer cell lines.
In addition, overexpression of TRIM16 significantly inhibited the migration and invasion in vitro, as well as suppressed the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) phenotype in ovarian cancer cells.
Furthermore, overexpression of TRIM16 greatly inhibited the protein expression levels of Shh, Smo, Ptc, Gli-1, MMP2, and MMP9 in ovarian cancer cells.
Taken together, these results strongly suggest that TRIM16 inhibits the migration and invasion via suppressing the Sonic hedgehog signaling pathway in ovarian cancer cells.
Thus, TRIM16 may be a novel potential therapeutic target for ovarian cancer.
In melanoma cells, loss of TRIM16 expression is a marker of cell migration and metastasis, while the BRAF inhibitor, vemurafenib, induces melanoma cell growth arrest in a TRIM16-dependent manner.
These findings suggest that the combination of C012 and vemurafenib may have therapeutic potential for the treatment of melanoma, and, that reactivation of TRIM16 may be an effective strategy for patients with this disease.
Tripartite Motif-containing protein 16 (TRIM16) is a member of a large family of tripartite motif (TRIM) proteins, that has been implicated in the pathogenesis of multiple cancers.
Co-immunoprecipitation assay demonstrated that TDP43 bound TRIM16 in neuroblastoma and breast cancer cells.
High levels of TRIM16 and TDP43 are associated with good prognosis in both human neuroblastoma and breast cancer tissues.
Importantly, we found TDP43 expression was required for TRIM16-induced inhibition of neuroblastoma and breast cancer cell growth and the repressive effect of TRIM16 on cell cycle regulatory proteins, E2F1 and pRb.
Taken together, our data suggest that TRIM16 and TDP43 are both good prognosis indicators; also we showed that TRIM16 inhibits cancer cell viability by a novel mechanism involving interaction and stabilisation of TDP43 with consequent effects on E2F1 and pRb proteins.
Tripartite motif 16 (TRIM16), a member of the RING B-box coiled-coil (RBCC)/tripartite totif (TRIM) protein family, has been demonstrated to have significant effects on tumor migration by previous studies, but its specific contribution to hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is currently unknown.
Compared with paired normal liver tissues in clinical cancer samples, we found that the expression of TRIM16 was significantly downregulated in HCC lesions.
In a previous study, we demonstrated that TRIM16 suppressed cancer malignancy and that TRIM16 expression levels were associated with favorable prognostic parameters of patients with cancer.
In the present study, we examined 29 human breast cancer specimens, and found that TRIM16 was lowly expressed in breast cancers; thus, TRIM16 expression is negatively correlated with metastasis in breast cancer patients.
Moreover, we showed that TRIM16 suppressed CSC properties in a population of breast cancer cells.
TRIM16 depletion resulted in an increased proportion of CSCs relative to breast cancer cells when several assays were used to assess CSC properties.
In conclusion, we propose that inhibition of CSC properties may be one of the functions of TRIM16 as a suppressor of breast cancer progression.
In an effort to profile the expression patterns of TRIM superfamily in several non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines, we found that the expression of 10 TRIM genes including TRIM3, TRIM7, TRIM14, TRIM16, TRIM21, TRIM22, TRIM29, TRIM59, TRIM66 and TRIM70 was significantly upregulated in NSCLC cell lines compared with the normal human bronchial epithelial (HBE) cell line, whereas the expression of 7 other TRIM genes including TRIM4, TRIM9, TRIM36, TRIM46, TRIM54, TRIM67 and TRIM76 was significantly down-regulated in NSCLC cell lines compared with that in HBE cells.
The present study was to examine the effect of Tripartite motif 16 (TRIM16) on epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and metastasis in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells, and its clinical significance in NSCLC.
The correlation of TRIM16 expression and clinical features of NSCLC was analyzed in paraffin-embedded archived normal lung tissues and NSCLC tissues by immunohistochemical analysis.
The expression of TRIM16 was markedly decreased in NSCLC and correlated with tumor metastasis.
Upregulation of TRIM16 significantly inhibited EMT and metastasis of NSCLC cells.
In contrast, silencing TRIM16 expression significantly promoted the EMT and metastasis of NSCLC cells both in vitro and in vivo.
Moreover, we demonstrated that downregulation of TRIM16 activated the sonic hedgehog pathway, and that inhibition of the sonic hedgehog pathway by cyclopamine abrogated the effect of TRIM16-downregulation induced EMT and metastasis on NSCLC cells.
Our results suggest that TRIM16 is a potential pharmacologic target for the treatment of NSCLC and promotion TRIM16 expression might represent a novel strategy to NSCLC metastasis.
High basal or induced expression of the tripartite motif protein, TRIM16, leads to reduce cell growth and migration of neuroblastoma and skin squamous cell carcinoma cells.
However, the role of TRIM16 in melanoma is currently unknown.
TRIM16 protein levels were markedly reduced in human melanoma cell lines, compared with normal human epidermal melanocytes due to both DNA methylation and reduced protein stability.
TRIM16 knockdown strongly increased cell migration in normal human epidermal melanocytes, while TRIM16 overexpression reduced cell migration and proliferation of melanoma cells in an interferon beta 1 (IFNBeta1)-dependent manner.
Low level TRIM16 expression in 91 melanoma patient samples, strongly correlated with lymph node metastasis, and, predicted poor patient prognosis in a separate cohort of 170 melanoma patients with lymph node metastasis.
The BRAF inhibitor, vemurafenib, increased TRIM16 protein levels in melanoma cells in vitro, and induced growth arrest in BRAF-mutant melanoma cells in a TRIM16-dependent manner.
High levels of TRIM16 in melanoma tissues from patients treated with Vemurafenib correlated with clinical response.
Our data, for the first time, demonstrates TRIM16 is a marker of cell migration and metastasis, and a novel treatment target in melanoma.
Recently it has been reported that Shosaiko-to (SHO), a traditional Chinese medicine used for treating gastritis and hepatitis, also has been found useful for treating gastric ulcers, although no pharmacological study has yet investigated the precise antiulcer properties of SHO.
Shosaiko-to (Xiao-chai-hu-tang, SHO), which is a Kampo medicine prepared by decocting a prescription of 7 kinds of medical plants, has been used mainly to treat chronic hepatitis in Japan.
The ability of FEX to enhance CC10 production may account, at least in part, for the clinical efficacy of the agent in allergic disorders, including allergic rhinitis.
Fexofenadine HCl (FEX) has previously been shown to have anti-inflammatory properties in relieving nasal congestion in allergic rhinitis.
This selective COX-2 inhibitor activity by FEX may contribute to its anti-inflammatory properties in relieving nasal congestion in allergic rhinitis.
A 24-h extended-release formulation of fexofenadine HCl 180 mg/pseudoephedrine HCl 240 mg (FEX 180 mg/PSE 240 mg) has recently been approved by the US Food and Drug Administration for symptom relief of seasonal allergic rhinitis, including nasal congestion.
We elected to study the effects of usual clinically recommended doses of fexofenadine (FEX), montelukast (ML) and FEX + ML combination, compared with placebo (PL), on nasal AMP challenge in patients with persistent allergic rhinitis.
Twelve patients with persistent allergic rhinitis (all skin prick positive to house dust mite) were randomized in a double-blind cross-over fashion to receive for 1 week either FEX 180 mg, ML 10 mg, FEX 180 mg + ML 10 mg combination, or PL, with nasal AMP challenge performed 12 h after dosing.
Objective We elected to study the comparative effectiveness of usual clinically recommended doses of desloratadine (DES), fexofenadine (FEX), and levocetirizine (LEV), on nasal adenosine monophosphate (AMP) challenge in patients with perennial allergic rhinitis (PAR).
We performed a placebo-controlled evaluation of the effects of BB and fexofenadine (FEX) on subjective and objective outcomes in patients with perennial allergic rhinitis.
Sixteen patients with perennial allergic rhinitis and house dust mite sensitization were randomized in double-blind cross-over fashion to receive for 1 week either BB 50 mg twice daily, FEX 180 mg once daily and placebo (PL) once daily, or PL twice daily.
BB and FEX, in comparison to PL, were equally effective in attenuating the nasal response to AMP and in improving nasal symptoms, highlighting a potential role for BB in the treatment of allergic rhinitis.
In vitro studies have shown much higher H1-receptor antagonist potency with desloratadine (DL) compared to fexofenadine (FEX), although it is unclear whether this has any clinical relevance on disease control parameters in seasonal allergic rhinitis (SAR), especially for nasal congestion.
Protein disulfide isomerase a4 (PDIA4) is implicated in the growth and death of tumor cells; however, its molecular mechanism and therapeutic potential in cancer are unclear.
Here, we found that PDIA4 expression was upregulated in a variety of tumor cell lines and human lung adenocarcinoma tissues.
Consistently, Lewis lung carcinoma cells overexpressing PDIA4 grew faster than did parental cells in tumor-bearing mice, as shown by a reduced survival rate, increased tumor size and metastasis, and decreased cell death and caspases 3 and 7 activity.
Moreover, results obtained in mice with spontaneous hepatoma indicated that PDIA4 deficiency significantly reduced hepatic tumorigenesis and cyst formation and increased mouse survival, tumor death, and caspases 3 and 7 activity.
These findings characterize PDIA4 as a negative regulator of cancer cell apoptosis and suggest that PDIA4 is a potential therapeutic target for cancer.
Top cancer-associated protein alterations were characterized by: (1) elevations in APEX1, HYOU1 and PDIA4, indicative of increased DNA repair machinery and heightened anti-oxidant defense mechanisms; (2) increased LRPPRC, STOML2, COPG1 and EPRS, suggesting altered tumor metabolism and inflammation; (3) reductions in SPTB, SPTA1 and ANK1 implying dysregulation of membrane integrity; and (4) decreased SLCA41 suggesting altered pH regulation.
Here, we demonstrate that CDDP-resistant non-small lung cancer cells undergo profound remodeling of their endoplasmic reticulum (ER) proteome (&gt;80 proteins identified by proteomics) and exhibit a dramatic overexpression of two protein disulfide isomerases, PDIA4 and PDIA6, without any alteration in ER-cytosol Ca(2+) fluxes.
Ten heat-shock-protein- (HSP-) associated protein complexes were separated and identified, and the differentially expressed proteins related to cancers were also found, such as HSP60, protein disulfide-isomerase A4 (ERp72), and transitional endoplasmic reticulum ATPase (TER ATPase).
Anti-CENPB was associated with joint pain [odds ratio (OR) 0.17], interstitial lung disease (OR 0.24) and telangiectasia (OR 4.00) (P &lt; 0.05).
Congenital anonychia is an inherited autosomal recessive disorder characterized by complete absence of fingernails or toenails, or both.
Previous studies have identified mutations in the RSPO4 and LMX1B components of the Wnt pathway in patients with the hypoplastic nail disorders anonychia and nail-patella syndrome, respectively.
Congenital anonychia is a rare autosomal-recessive disorder characterized by the absence of finger- and toenails.
The results suggest that consumption of a white corn/bean snack (70%/30% blend) attenuates weight gain, fat mass accumulation, adipocyte size and nonalcoholic fatty liver disease in HFD-fed mice by inhibiting PPARGamma and SREBF2.
These results demonstrated that the gene polymorphism of SREBP2 not only significantly associated with the clinical phenotypes of ONFH but also closely related to lipid metabolism disorder.
Farnesoid X receptor (FXR, NR1H4) plays an important role in the regulation of bile acid homeostasis in liver and intestine and may exert protective effects against certain forms of cancer such as colon carcinoma.
Similar to FXR, microRNA-192 (miR-192) is mainly expressed in the liver and colon and plays an important role in the pathogenesis of colon carcinoma.
In addition, the correlation between FXR and miR-192 expression was studied by linear regression analyses in colonic adenocarcinoma tissue from 27 patients.
Significant inverse correlations were detected in colonic adenocarcinoma between NR1H4 mRNA and miR-192-3p expression.
In vitro, we measured the impact of APC inactivation and deoxycholic acid (DCA) treatment on FXR expression in human colon cancer HCT-116 cells transfected with silencing RNA for APC and HT-29 cells carrying inactivated APC.
In human HCT-116 but not HT-29 colon cancer cells, DCA induced FXR expression and lowered CpG methylation of FXR.
We conclude that the loss of APC function favors the silencing of FXR expression through CpG hypermethylation in mouse colonic mucosa and human colon cells, leading to reduced expression of downstream targets (SHP, IBABP) involved in BA homeostasis while increasing the expression of factors (COX-2, c-MYC) that contribute to inflammation and colon cancer.
This study investigates the regulation of FXR in the development of human colon cancer.
We used immunohistochemistry of FXR in normal tissue (n = 238), polyps (n = 32), and adenocarcinomas, staged I-IV (n = 43, 39, 68, and 9), of the colon; RT-quantitative PCR, reverse-phase protein array, and Western blot analysis in 15 colon cancer cell lines; NR1H4 promoter methylation and mRNA expression in colon cancer samples from The Cancer Genome Atlas; DNA methyltransferase inhibition; methyl-DNA immunoprecipitation (MeDIP); bisulfite sequencing; and V-Ki-ras2 Kirsten rat sarcoma viral oncogene homolog (KRAS) knockdown assessment to investigate FXR regulation in colon cancer development.
The NR1H4 promoter is methylated in ~12% colon cancer The Cancer Genome Atlas samples, and methylation patterns segregate with tumor subtypes.
FXR expression is decreased early in human colon cancer progression, and both DNA methylation and KRAS signaling may be contributing factors to FXR silencing.
FXR potentially suppresses epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and other oncogenic signaling cascades, and restoration of FXR activity, by blocking silencing mechanisms or increasing residual FXR activity, represents promising therapeutic options for the treatment of colon cancer.
Aim of this study was to analyze FXR expression in human normal intestinal mucosa and colon carcinoma.
We achieved systematic mapping of FXR expression of human intestinal mucosa and analysis of 75 human colon carcinomas using FXR immunohistochemistry on formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue.
Development of colon carcinoma in humans is associated with reduced FXR expression independent of site and may reflect an impaired defense against potentially carcinogenic bile acids along their intestinal gradient.
When FXR is activated in the intestine and in colon cancer cells, there is an induction of apoptosis and removal of genetically altered cells, which may otherwise progress to complete transformation.
Thus, from a therapeutic standpoint, strategies aimed at reactivating FXR expression in colon tumors might be useful in treatment of colon cancer.
G-CSF administration has neuroprotective effects in CNS and the potential to be a therapeutic agent in multiple sclerosis.
The conclusions of G-CSF treatment in EAE mice suggest that G-CSF is clinically applicable and may be considered for future use in therapeutic measures for multiple sclerosis treatment.
In a group of 19 consecutive patients with multiple sclerosis given autografts, we employed granulocyte colony-stimulating factors to mobilize stem cells from the bone marrow to the peripheral blood, either the original granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (n = 10) or a Mexican granulocyte colony-stimulating factor biosimilar (n = 9).
Moreover, FoxC1 was recruited to the ZEB2 promoter by its interaction with the pioneer transcription factor pre-B-cell leukemia homeobox 1 (PBX1).
Enforced overexpression or RNAi-mediated knockdown of PBX1 contributed to the diminished or restored Cx32 expression in GES-1 and the gastric carcinoma cell line BGC823, respectively.
Chimeric transcription factor E2A-PBX1 induces the development of acute lymphoblastic B-cell leukemia in children.
Using a transgenic mouse model, we previously demonstrated that homeobox (HOX) gene HOXA9 genetically interact with E2A-PBX1 gene in the development of B-cell leukemia in mice.
Pre-B-cell leukemia homeobox 1 (PBX1) was originally identified as a proto-oncogene in human leukemia.
Although this protein has been shown to contribute to cellular development and tumorigenesis, the role of PBX1 in gastric carcinoma (GC) remains unclear.
In childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), t(1;19)(q23;p13.3) with TCF3-PBX1 fusion is one of the most frequent translocations.
Here we report that Dact1-deficient mice have multiple physiological defects that resemble the human neonate disease congenital caudal regression syndrome, including caudal vertebrae agenesis, anorectal malformation, renal agenesis/dysplasia, fused kidneys, and loss of bladder.
Calretinin-immunopositive immature Sertoli cells revealed by co-localization of both markers, calretinin and CK-18, were identified in the mixed atrophy group in seminiferous tubules demonstrating spermatogenic failure.
Disorders of Sertoli cell differentiation as indicated by calretinin and/or CK-18 expression contribute to the multifactorial mechanisms underlying spermatogenic failure.
In the group representing normal spermatogenesis (obstructive azoospermia, 6 men) and in the group characterized by spermatocyte maturation arrest (6 men), the areas occupied by anti-Mullerian hormone- and CK-18-positive cells were minimal.
Quantitative measurements on testicular biopsies revealed the highest CK-18 expression in the mixed atrophy biopsies (22 men), a lower expression in the Sertoli cell-only (SCO) biopsies (12 men), and minimal residual staining in the group considered as representing normal spermatogenesis (six obstructive azoospermia patients).
The cause that determined the spermatogenic defect in the other cases of male infertility with high CK-18 expression may have damaged both the Sertoli and the germ cells.
Kidney function and proteinuria were more severe in patients with PAX2 mutations than in those without the mutation.
These were associated with enhanced expression of beta-catenin, Oct3/4, WT1, Pax2 and nephrin, an essential transmembrane protein required for the formation of the scaffoldings of the podocyte slit-diaphragm, permitting the filtration of small ions, but not massive excretion of proteins, hence proteinuria.
ENH1 interacts with various Protein Kinase C (PKC) isozymes and Protein Kinase D1 (PKD1).
The downstream events of the ENH1-PKC/PKD1 complex remain unknown.
From a yeast two-hybrid assay, we have identified Enigma Homolog 1 (ENH1) as a new binding partner of PKD1.
Since in neurons, ENH1, associated with protein kinase Cepsilon, was shown to modulate the activity of N-type calcium channels, and the pore-forming subunit of the cardiac L-type voltage-gated calcium channel, alpha1C, possesses a potential phosphorylation site for PKD1, we studied here a possible role of ENH1 and PKD1 in the regulation of the cardiac L-type voltage-gated calcium channel.
Both ENH1 and PKD1 interact with alpha1C in cardiomyocytes.
Silencing of ENH1 prevented the binding of PKD1 to alpha1C.
Moreover, a dominant negative mutant of PKD1 or the silencing of ENH1 inhibited the alpha-adrenergic-induced increase of L-type calcium currents.
We found a new binding partner, ENH1, and a new target, alpha1C, for PKD1 in neonatal rat cardiomyocytes.
We propose a model where ENH1 scaffolds PKD1 to alpha1C in order to form a signalling complex that regulates the activity of cardiac L-type voltage-gated Ca(2+) channels.
Seven putative candidate genes located in 4q22, DAPP1, BMPR1B, PKD2, HERC3, SMARCAD1, CEB1 and ENH were screened for mutations but no somatic alterations were identified.
There is growing evidence for extramotor dysfunction (EMd) in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), with a reported prevalence of up to 52%.
Moreover, StA conferred significant protection against MPTP-induced loss of TH-positive dopaminergic neurons in a Parkinson's disease (PD) mice model.
The aim of this study was to compare the mRNA expression patterns of Interleukin (IL)-4, interferon (IFN)-Gamma and Acyl Co A long chain 3 (ACSL3) in peripheral blood leukocytes of children with and without asthma.
IL-4 mRNA expression was significantly increased (P &lt; 0.05) in children with asthma compared to healthy control group whereas no differences were observed for either IFN-Gamma or ACSL3 mRNA.
Methylation of the ACSL3 5'-CGI was found to be significantly associated with maternal airborne PAH exposure exceeding 2.41 ng/m(3) (OR = 13.8; p&lt;0.001; sensitivity = 75%; specificity = 82%) and with a parental report of asthma symptoms in children prior to age 5 (OR = 3.9; p&lt;0.05).
Thus, if validated, methylated ACSL3 5'CGI in UCWBC DNA may be a surrogate endpoint for transplacental PAH exposure and/or a potential biomarker for environmentally-related asthma.
The aim of the study was to investigate the expression of selected genes encoding enzymes involved in the antioxidant defense system (superoxide dismutase 2, SOD2; aldehyde dehydrogenase 1, ALDH1A1; microsomal glutathione S-transferase 1, MGST1) in fragments of anterior lens capsules of patients with pseudoexfoliation syndrome (PEX).
Twenty-four eyes of 24 patients with refractory diffuse diabetic macular edema scheduled to undergo phacoemulsification cataract surgery were randomly assigned to receive either a 4-mg IVT (n = 12) or a 40-mg STI (n = 12) of triamcinolone acetonide during cataract surgery.
FANCJ belongs to a conserved iron-sulfur (Fe S) cluster family of helicases important for genomic stability including XPD (nucleotide excision repair), DDX11 (sister chromatid cohesion), and RTEL (telomere metabolism), genetically linked to xeroderma pigmentosum/Cockayne syndrome, Warsaw breakage syndrome, and dyskeratosis congenita, respectively.
NUAK1 and NUAK2 double mutants exhibited exencephaly, facial clefting, and spina bifida.
Interstitial pneumonia with autoimmune features (IPAF) is a newly described entity that encompasses interstitial lung disease in patients with clinical, serologic, or morphologic features suggestive of but not diagnostic of collagen vascular disease; these patients are thought to have better outcomes than idiopathic interstitial pneumonias.
IPAF is a new term to label patients with possible collagen vascular disease-related interstitial lung disease.
Interstitial pneumonia with autoimmune features (IPAF) identifies a recently recognized autoimmune syndrome characterized by interstitial lung disease and autoantibodies positivity, but absence of a specific connective tissue disease diagnosis or alternative etiology.
To identify the prognostic factors for survival in patients with interstitial pneumonia with autoimmune features (IPAF) who meet the serological domain of the IPAF criteria.
Univariate Cox analysis revealed systemic sclerosis (SSc)-specific and SSc-associated antibodies (ANA nucleolar pattern, ANA centromere pattern, anti-ribonucleoprotein and anti-Scl-70) positive IPAF, radiological NSIP pattern, bronchoalveolar lavage fluid lymphocytes &gt;15%, and age as significant prognostic factors for survival.
We confirmed that radiological NSIP pattern and age are poor prognostic factors for the survival of IPAF patients.
To marshal these ununiform classification criteria, the "European Respiratory Society/American Thoracic Society Task Force on Undifferentiated Forms of Connective Tissue Disease-associated Interstitial Lung Disease" proposed a consensus regarding the nomenclature and classification criteria for patients with IIP and features of autoimmunity with the term "interstitial pneumonia with autoimmune features" (IPAF).
It was reported that patients with IPAF accounted for 7.3%~34.1% of patients with interstitial lung disease (ILD).
Furthermore, it is not determined whether IPAF is a distinct category of ILD or simply a part of IIP.
Interstitial pneumonia with autoimmune features (IPAF) describes the subset of patients with interstitial pneumonia who have features suggesting underlying autoimmunity, but whose features fall short of a clear diagnosis of CTD.
CTD associated ILD (CTD-ILD) occurs most commonly in the context of an established CTD, but can be the first and/or only manifestation of an occult CTD or occur in patients who have features suggestive of an autoimmune process, but not meeting diagnostic criteria for a defined CTD-recently defined as "interstitial pneumonia with autoimmune features" (IPAF).
A recent European Respiratory Society/American Thoracic Society statement proposed research criteria for interstitial pneumonia with autoimmune features (IPAF), which includes findings from the clinical, serologic, and morphologic domains.
- Patients with idiopathic interstitial pneumonia at the University of Chicago who underwent surgical lung biopsy or lung transplantation were assessed for IPAF histopathologic features, using the initial pathology interpretation in the electronic records.
This rereview demonstrated nonspecific interstitial pneumonia in 8 of 36 patients (22.2%) and lymphoplasmacytic infiltrates in 6 of 36 patients (16.7%), resulting in an additional 7 of 36 patients (19.4%) with idiopathic interstitial pneumonia that met the IPAF criteria.
The objective of this study is to determine the CT findings and patterns of interstitial pneumonia with autoimmune features (IPAF) and to assess whether imaging can predict survival for patients with IPAF.
Subjects with high baseline levels of SCF had lower cardiovascular (n = 340) and all-cause mortality (n = 1159) as well as a lower risk of heart failure (n = 177), stroke (n = 318) and myocardial infarction (n = 452).
The highest SCF quartile remained independently associated with a lower risk of a lower risk of cardiovascular [hazard ratio and 95% confidence interval 0.59 (0.43-0.81)] and all-cause mortality [0.68 (0.57-0.81)], heart failure [0.50 (0.31-0.80)] and stroke [0.66 (0.47-0.92)], but not with MI [0.96 (0.72-1.27)] as compared with the lowest quartile when adjusting for traditional cardiovascular risk factors in Cox proportional hazard regression models.
These data suggest that a stroke-damaged brain is repairable by SCF + G-CSF even 6 months after the lesion occurs.
Preload-recruitable stroke work was significantly higher in pigs after SCF treatment (Ad.SCF, 55.5+/-11.6 mm Hg versus Ad.Beta-gal, 31.6+/-12.6 mm Hg, P=0.005), indicating enhanced cardiac function.
After stroke, a condition associated with brain aging where oxidative injury affects peri-infarcted regions, a simultaneous increase in SCF and IGF-I expression was found in the cortex, suggesting that a similar cooperative response takes place in vivo.
We have demonstrated the therapeutic effects of the combination of stem cell factor (SCF) and granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) (SCF+G-CSF) on chronic stroke.
However, it remains unclear how SCF+G-CSF repairs the brain in chronic stroke.
In this study, we determined the effects of SCF+G-CSF on neuronal network remodeling in the aged brain of chronic stroke.
These data suggest that SCF+G-CSF treatment in chronic stroke remodels neural circuits in the aged brain.
The growth inhibition under combination treatment and single agent was explored by the MTT cell viability assay and the Annexin V/propidium iodide (PI) apoptosis assay in different CTCL cell lines and tumor cells derived from Sezary syndrome patients.
The patients presented with the characteristic symptoms of Jacobsen syndrome (JBS), including: mental retardation, short stature, and craniofacial dysmorphism in all 3 cases; cardiac defects in 2 cases; and thrombocytopenia, brain abnormality, eye coloboma, recurrent infections, cryptorchidism and toe anomalies in single cases.
Two brothers showed hypotonia, mental retardation, ocular abnormalities with impaired vision and colobomas and a breathing pattern compatible with JBS.
The expression of EPH receptor A8 (EPHA8), synovial sarcoma translocation chromosome 18 (SS18), interactor of little elongation complex ELL subunit 1 (ICE1), patched 1 (PTCH1), mutS homolog 3 (MSH3) and caspase recruitment domain family member 11 (CARD11) were also shown to be altered in GC cells in the cBioPortal for Cancer Genomics analysis.
Moreover, lncRNA RP11-838N2.4 acts as an endogenous sponge, suppressing the function of miR-10a through conserved sequences and increasing the expression of EphA8 that enhanced the rate of cell apoptosis, thereby intensified sensitivity of GBM cells to TMZ.
In this study, we determined the mRNA and protein expression levels of EphA8 in cancerous and normal ovarian tissue samples by quantitative reverse transcription PCR (qRT-PCR) (N = 60) and tissue microarray immunohistochemistry analysis (TMA-IHC) (N = 223) respectively.
EphA8 protein levels in cancer tissues were correlated with epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) patients' clinical characteristics and overall survival.
Collectively, we unveil a branch of the miR-10a/EphA8 pathway that regulates the progression of glioma.
To further explore these mutations, we examined all reported mutations of NTRK3, FES, KDR, EPHA3, NTRK2, JAK1, PDGFRA, EPHA7, EPHA8, ERBB4, FGFR1, MLK4 and GUCY2F genes in the 24 colorectal cancer cell lines.
The serum tryptase level was normal, cysteine-rich hydrophobic domain 2 (CHIC2) deletion analysis of bone marrow cells was negative and no evidence of mastocytosis or other hematological disorder was found in the bone marrow.
Integrin AlfavBeta3 (vitronectin receptor) plays a prominent role in angiogenesis, a key pathogenic feature of rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
In experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), we found that inflammatory cytokine-producing Th17 cells showed increased CD73 expression as disease progressed.
The aim of the present study was to analyze the activities of extracellular purine metabolizing enzymes, CD39 (apyrase, EC 3.6.1.5) and CD73 (ecto-5' nucleotidase, EC 3.1.3.5) in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE).
Secondly, CD73 promotes the migration of pathogenic T cells into the central nervous system during experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.
Because of the strong immunosuppressive and antiinflammatory properties of adenosine, we predicted that cd73(-/-) mice would develop severe experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), an animal model for the central nervous system (CNS) inflammatory disease, multiple sclerosis.
To determine the molecular background of the development of hypopharyngeal squamous cell carcinomas (HPSCCs) and double esophageal squamous cell carcinomas (DESCCs), the present study immunohistochemically assessed tumor-related protein expression [p53, Fhit (fragile histidine triad), E-cadherin and activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID)], and subsequently determined the correlation between protein expression and clinicopathological data.
We identified 27 mutated genes, of which 19 genes are reported in COSMIC database (ZNF208, CRNN, ATXN3, DCTN1, RP1L1, PRB4, PRB1, MUC4, HS6ST3, MUC17, JAM2, ITGAD, IREB2, IQUB, CORO1B, CCDC121, AKAP2, ACAN and ACADL), and eight genes have not previously been described in gastric cancer (CCDC178, ARMC4, TUBB6, PLIN4, PKLR, PDZD2, DMBT1and DAB1).Additionally,GPX4 and MPND in 19q13.3-13.4 region, is characterized as a novel fusion-gene.
To investigate the association between gastric cardia adenocarcinoma (GCA) and ten functional single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), including TP53BP1 rs560191 G&gt;C, CASP8 rs1035142 G&gt;T, CASP7 rs3127075 G&gt;C, CASP7 rs7907519 C&gt;A, and six C1orf10/CRNN variants.
They were synthesized from substituted anthranilic acids and trimellitic anhydride chloride, followed by reaction with primary amines and were tested for the inhibition of five physiologically relevant CA isoforms, the human (h) hCA I, II, IV, VII and XII, some of which are involved in serious pathologies (CA II, IV and XII in glaucoma; CA VII in epilepsy; CA XII in some solid tumors).
More intense StarD6 immunolocalization was seen in the strata radiatum and lacunosum-moleculare, particularly in CA1-2 areas until 12 h after pilocarpine-induced epilepsy.
Regulation of these steps requires successive binding of MED26 N-terminal domain (NTD) to TATA-binding protein-associated factor 7 (TAF7) and Eleven-nineteen lysine-rich in leukemia-Associated Factor 1 (EAF1).
Sperm-specific histone variants Sp H1 and Sp H2B are maintained as phosphorylated derivatives N and O/P throughout spermatogenesis and early embryogenesis and egg specific histone variants CS H1 and CS H2A are phosphorylated during early embryogenesis.
Then, in parallel with chromatin decondensation, nearly all phosphorylated Sp H1 is lost from the pronuclear chromatin, with the concurrent assimilation of the egg phosphoprotein CS H1.
The anaemia and thrombocytopenia of hypophysectomized (Hypox) rats could be corrected readily by daily treatment with human placental lactogen.
HA-nIR women have markedly elevated LH, often have minimally elevated serum prolactin, and have polycystic ovaries.
Therefore, it was hypothesized that SIRT1 might be important in the development of myocardial infarction.
These findings provide direct evidence that the SIRT1/UCP-2 axis might be important in myocardial infarction, and suggest that this axis may be a novel therapeutic target for the treatment of cardiovascular disease.
Inclusion criteria were non-small-cell lung cancer patients with bone metastases confirmed by pathology or cytology; available imaging data of pelvic metastatic lesions; aged 18 to 75 years old; expected survival at least 3 months; not receiving taxane, bevacizumab, thalidomide, rh-endostatin, or bisphosphonate; not having radiation therapy within 3 months of enrollment into study; normal results of routine blood tests, liver and kidney function, and electrocardiogram; absence of cardiovascular disease, autoimmune disease, vasculitis, severe infection, diabetes, and other concomitant disease; and signed informed consent.
Further study is needed to confirm survival benefit of platinum-based chemotherapy for elderly non-small-cell lung cancer [UMIN-CTR (www.umin.ac.jp/ctr/) ID: C000000146].
ObcneAoBanN 40 namyNeHToB c aKc-CnA (KpNTepNN ASAS, 2009; Bo3pacT 38,5+/-12,1 roAa; 29 (72,5%) MyX4NH; AnNTenbHocTb aKc-CnA 6,67+/-5,8 roAa; NHAeKc BASDAI &gt;=4,0), KoTopble B cny4aNHoM nopRAKe pa3AeneHbl Ha rpynnbl: 20 bonbHblx npNHNManN myeneKoKcNb no 400 Mr/cyT B Te4eHNe 30 AHeN, 20 namyNeHToB - B Te4eHNe 7 AHeN myeneKoKcNb no 600 Mr/cyT, 3aTeM npoAonXNnN npNeM npenapaTa no 200 Mr/cyT Ao 1 Mec.
NamyNeHTbl HapRAy co cTaHAapTHoN cxeMoN ne4eHNR nony4anN MenaKceH 3 Mr/cyT B Te4eHNe 3 Mec.
NonoBNHa ETNx namyNeHToB bblnN onepNpoBaHbl cpa3y, a ApyrNe - nocne oapMaKonorN4ecKoro npeKoHANmyNoHNpoBaHNR aKToBerNHoM B Ao3e 1200 Mr/cyT B Te4eHNe 1,5 Mec.
NamyNeHTbl npNHNManN MarHepoT B cpeAHeM no 1878+/-823 Mr/cyT B Te4eHNe 4,2+/-29 Mec.
To determine the effects of laser photocoagulation on serum levels of angiopoietin-1 (Ang-1), angiopoietin-2 (Ang-2), soluble angiopoietin receptor Tie-2 (Tie-2), Ang-1/Ang-2 ratio and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) and proliferative diabetic retinopathy (PDR).
Certain mutations in the COL1A1 and COL1A2 genes produce clinical symptoms of both osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) and Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) that include abnormal craniofacial growth, dental malocclusion, and dentinogenesis imperfecta.
RBP1, TFRC, SPP1, SAA1, ARHGAP8, and NDRG1, which were upregulated, and GATA3, PLAGL1, APOD, DUSP1, and CYR61, which were downregulated, were considered as candidate genes associated with invasion of cervical cancer.
In addition, RGS18-/- mice presented a mild thrombocytopenia, accompanied with a marked deficit in MK number in the bone marrow.
Finally, RGS18 deficiency was correlated to a defect of platelet recovery in vivo under acute conditions of thrombocytopenia.
RGS18 depletion in zebrafish results in thrombocytopenia, as 66 to 88% of the embryos lack thrombocytes after injection of an ATG or splice-blocking morpholino, respectively.
Nuts, when eaten alongside other nutritionally rich foods, may decrease obesity and related chronic disease risks, which are high among African American women in the rural South.
Nut consumption decreases risk for obesity and chronic diseases, which are prevalent among African-American women in the rural southeastern United States.
Recently, UCH-L1 has been found to increase cancer cell migration and invasion by modulating hydrogen peroxide generated by NADPH oxidase 4 (NOX4).
This study also showed that UCH-L1 promotes angiogenesis of HUVECs, as well as invasion in cancer cells, by up-regulating ROS by deubiquitination of NOX4, suggesting that UCH-L1 plays a key role in angiogenesis of HUVECS by regulating ROS levels by deubiquitination of NOX4.
NADPH oxidase 4 (NOX4) is a member of the NADPH oxidase (NOX) family of enzymes and has been found abnormally expressed in human cancers.
Among NADPH oxidase isoforms, NADPH oxidase4 (Nox4) is highly expressed in the kidney and has an important role in kidney diseases, such as diabetic nephropathy and renal carcinoma.
Finally, we show that NOX4 silencing, through PKM2, sensitizes cultured and ex vivo freshly isolated human-renal carcinoma cells to drug-induced cell death in xenograft models and ex vivo cultures.
Although the NOX isoforms NOX2, 4, 5, 6, and RAC1 were readily detectable by RT-PCR in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC)-derived Panc1 and Colo357 cells, only NOX4 and RAC1 were expressed at higher levels comparable to those in peripheral blood monocytes.
In the case-pediatric control and case-adult control analyses, five polymorphisms were associated with increased likelihood of pediatric-onset type 2 diabetes; only one of these polymorphisms (CADM2/rs1307880) also showed a consistent effect in the case-sibling analysis.
ADORA/rs903361, CADM2/rs13078807, GNPDA2/rs10938397, VEGFA/rs6905288 and FTO/rs9939609 are associated with an increased risk of pediatric-onset type 2 diabetes in the Mexican population.
Finally, we did not identify any rare mutations co-segregating with obesity in common obesity susceptibility genes, except for CADM2 and QPCTL, where we found two novel variants (p.Arg81His and p.Leu98Pro, respectively) in three obese individuals.
Eight obesity-related SNPs in the FTO, MAP2K5, NEGR1, FLJ35779, ETV5, CADM2, and NUDT3 genes were nominally significantly associated with hair color among 5,876 individuals of European ancestry.
Here, we searched biological databases and discovered 33 additional genes associated with human obesity (CADM2, GIPR, GPCR5B, LRP1B, NEGR1, NRXN3, SH2B1, FANCL, GNPDA2, HMGCR, MAP2K5, NUDT3, PRKD1, QPCTL, TNNI3K, MTCH2, DNAJC27, SLC39A8, MTIF3, RPL27A, SEC16B, ETV5, HMGA1, TFAP2B, TUB, ZNF608, FAIM2, KCTD15, LINGO2, POC5, PTBP2, TMEM18, TMEM160).
Connections among specific proteins (Bax, Bcl-2, bFGF, COX-1, COX-2, E-cad, p15, p53, PCNA, TGFbeta3, TUNEL, vWF) in control of cell proliferation, apoptosis, cell adhesion, tumor vascularity and PGE2 content were evaluated in colon cancer as related to disease progression and survival.
In conclusion, this study demonstrates that MVD quantified using a Mab to CD105 is an independent prognostic parameter for survival of patients with colorectal cancer, and that plasma levels of CD105, TGFbeta1, TGFbeta3 and CD105/TGFbeta complexes may be useful markers for assessing disease progression.
We developed a mouse model for colon cancer that identifies an early role for TGF-beta1 in tumor suppression and implicates TGF-beta2 or TGF-beta3 in the prevention of metastasis.
We have developed a gene-environment interaction model of holoprosencephaly in mice, in which mutation of the Sonic hedgehog coreceptor, Cdon, synergizes with transient in utero exposure to ethanol.
We report here that t-butyl alcohol, which is neither a substrate nor an inhibitor of alcohol dehydrogenases or Cyp2E1, is a potent inducer of holoprosencephaly in Cdon mutant mice.
In addition, Boc, but not Cdon, mediates axon guidance information provided by Hh in specific neuronal populations, whereas mutations in the CDON cause holoprosencephaly, a human congenital anomaly defined by forebrain midline defects prominently associated with diminished Hh pathway activity.
Sequencing of the CDON, SHH, ZIC2, SIX3, and TGIF genes (associated with holoprosencephaly) did not disclose pathogenic alterations.
Serum levels of HMGB-1 are increased in patients with AAA than those in normal controls because the ALs in AAAs secrete HMGB-1.
Triple A syndrome (alacrima, achalasia, adrenal failure, progressive neurodegenerative disease) is caused by mutations in the AAAS gene which encodes the protein alacrima achalasia adrenal insufficiency neurologic disorder (ALADIN).
The prevalence and progression of anterior atlantoaxial subluxations (aAASs), vertical subluxations (VSs), subaxial subluxations (SASs), and associated cervical myelopathy in RA over the past 50 years were determined.
The results further proved that overexpression of NKG2A in NK cells was important for inhibiting the recruitment and activity of neutrophils to alleviate DSS-induced colitis.
Here, we provide a new anti-inflammation mechanism about ANXA1 secreted from injured IECs, where ANXA1 can stimulate the expression of NKG2A in NK cells that affect the recruitment and activity of neutrophils necessary for pathology of colitis.
Elevated levels of inflammatory cytokines (IL-8 and CCL2) were observed in the aqueous humor samples obtained from atopic glaucoma patients compared with those from senile cataract patients.
Morphologic studies revealed a diffuse glomerulonephritis characterized by the presence of numerous subendothelial deposits containing IgG, IgA, C3, Clq, C4, and properdin, and an acute dermal vasculitis associated with similar immune complex deposits.
Sixth (abducens) nerve palsy (ANP) is far less frequent in children and has not been reported as a sign of acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM).
We present an infant case of ADEM with bilateral abducens nerve palsy (BANP).
We report one case of BANP in a 15-month-old boy of fulminant ADEM.
BANP can be a symptom of ADEM.
Therefore, we investigated the possible mechanisms of the beneficial effect of LCZ696, in which the inhibition of neprilysin enhances atrial natriuretic peptide (NP) or brain NP (ANP or BNP)-evoked signals that can block Ang II/AT1 receptor-induced aldosterone (Ald) synthesis in human adrenocortical cells.
In Ang II-sensitized human adrenocortical cells, ANP or BNP alone, but not LBQ657 or valsartan alone, significantly decreased Ald synthesis.
The level of suppression of Ald synthesis by ANP or BNP with LBQ657 was greater than that by ANP or BNP without LBQ657.
In recent years, researchers have found that adiponectin (ANP) plays an important role in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD), and low serum concentrations of ANP are associated with AD.
The MAPT H1c haplotype is a risk factor for the neurodegenerative tauopathies progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) and Alzheimer's disease.
In addition, the MAPT H1-clade specific sub-haplotype, H1c, has been strongly associated with the tauopathies, progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) and corticobasal degeneration (CBD) and, to a lesser extent, with Alzheimer's disease (AD).
Previously we have shown that the H1c haplotype on the background of the H1 clade of haplotypes at the MAPT locus is associated with increased risk for progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), corticobasal degeneration (CBD) and Alzheimer's disease (AD).
By comparing the interstitial fluid profile of the leiomyoma with that of the normal myometrium, the levels of seven proteins were found to be significantly different: four structural organization proteins (desmin, prelamin-A/C, transgelin and Alfa-actinin-1), an inflammatory response (Alfa1-antitrypsin), a response to oxidative stress (peroxiredoxin-2), and a folding protein (heat shock 70 kDa protein 1A/1B).
Desmin, Alfa1-antitrypsin and peroxiredoxin-2 were upregulated in the leiomyoma, whereas heat shock 70 kDa protein 1A/1B, Alfa-actinin-1, prelamin-A/C and transgelin were downregulated.
Our data suggest that LL-37, in addition to its established roles, may play a role in the chronic neuroinflammation which is observed in neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease.
Muscle cramps may be a symptom of any of several conditions, including radiculopathies, Parkinson's disease, hypothyroidism, diabetes mellitus, vascular problems, electrolyte disorders, and metabolic myopathies.
Dystonia unrelated to treatment can be typical (blepharospasm, torticollis), atypical (parkinsonian writer's cramp, camptocormia, anismus), or occurring in earlyonset Parkinson disease (the so-called kinesigenic foot dystonia, considered a hallmark of early-onset Parkinson's disease).
Topics discussed include writer's cramp, multiple sclerosis, Parkinson's disease, schizophrenia, drug-induced parkinsonism, dopamine depletion, dysgraphia, motor development, developmental coordination disorder, caffeine, alertness, arousal, sleep deprivation, visual feedback transformation and suppression, eye-hand coordination, pen grip, pen pressure, movement fluency, bimanual interference, dominant versus non-dominant hand, tracing, freehand drawing, spiral drawing, reading, typewriting, and automatic segmentation.
We comparatively investigated predictive and reactive grip force behaviour in 12 subjects with basal ganglia dysfunction (six subjects with Parkinson's disease, six subjects with writer's cramp), two subjects chronically lacking all tactile and proprioceptive sensory feedback and 16 sex- and age-matched control subjects.
Thus the proliferative synovitis in this CACP syndrome can be more accurately thought of as hypercellularity by infiltrating macrophages with a contribution by proliferating fibroblastic synoviocytes.
A 263 Kb homozygous deletion of FMN1 was associated with oligosyndactyly, radioulnar synostosis, hearing loss and renal defects, features identical to ld mice.
A 1.7 Mb duplication encompassing both the GREM1 and FMN1 genes was detected in a patient with isolated Cenani-Lenz-like oligosyndactyly of the hands, resembling the transgenic chick wings in which Grem1 was over-expressed.
Typical image of Crouzon syndrome has been found in the woman and three children and its abortive form--in the man.
In acute fatty liver of pregnancy, profound hemostatic changes occur, which may be caused by a combination of liver failure and disseminated intravascular coagulation.
To estimate the frequency of disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC); elucidate the genesis of hemostatic dysfunction; and characterize associated hemolysis in women with acute fatty liver of pregnancy.
The most common obstetric causes of admission were massive postpartum haemorrhage (n=42, 20.29%) and pregnancy associated hypertension (n=36, 17.39%), followed by acute fatty liver of pregnancy (AFLP, n=27, 13.04%), obstetric disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC, n=23, 11.11%).
In this study, we detected the expression of HOXA7 gene in human acute promyelocytic leukemia cell line NB4.
The study suggested that HOXA7 might be a new gene candidate that influences the maturation of acute myeloid leukemia, and provided the molecular basis for the treatment for acute promyelocyticleukemia.
Although PBX proteins are known to increase DNA-binding/transcriptional activity of HOX proteins through their direct binding, the functional importance of their interaction in leukemogenesis is unclear.We recently reported that overexpression of a 4-homeobox-gene signature (ie, PBX3/HOXA7/HOXA9/HOXA11) is an independent predictor of poor survival in patients with cytogenetically abnormal acute myeloid leukemia (CA-AML).
In this study, we investigated the cytotoxic activity of Antp-TPR peptide toward acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cells.
By investigations of muscle tissue from patients with polymyositis, inclusion-body myositis (IBM), and dermatomyositis a predominance of the cytokines interleukin-1 alpha and -1 beta and transforming growth factor beta was observed.
Tuberous sclerosis is associated with three central nervous system pathologies: cortical/subcortical tubers, subependymal nodules (SENs), and subependymal giant cell astrocytomas (SEGAs).
As about 10-15% of SENs enlarge and transform into SEGAs, we examined here the possible mechanism of the phenomenon.
Subependymal nodules (SENs) and subependymal giant cell astrocytomas (SEGAs) are common brain lesions found in patients with tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC).
Nine SENs had measured MTR below 20.72% and six nodules among these were located in the region of the foramen of Monro, which is the characteristic location of SGCA.
In ulcerative colitis (UC), PNAd-expressing HEV-like vessels are induced, preferentially in the active phase, and T cells, particularly CD4(+) T cells, are closely associated with these vessels, suggesting that T cell recruitment via PNAd-expressing HEV-like vessels plays at least a partial role in UC pathogenesis.
In the colonic mucosa with ulcerative colitis (UC), it has been suggested that L-selectin-peripheral lymph node addressin (PNAd) interaction plays a role in lymphocyte recruitment, which requires PNAd induction on high endothelial venule (HEV)-like vessels.
Positive lod scores were found for marker loci at the proximal part of the short arm of the X chromosome, DXS255 and TIMP (Zmax = 3.93 and 3.18 at theta = 0.0), suggesting an assignment of the locus for AIED to this part of the X chromosome.
As a CXC subtype member of the chemokine superfamily, CXCL13 is considered to be involved in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), especially in lupus nephritis (LN).
Among these, the CXCL13/CXCR5 axis is thought to be involved critically in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and lupus nephritis pathogenesis.
We propose that CXCR5 is involved critically in B cell trafficking and germinal cell (GC) formation in murine lupus and in guiding pathogenic DN T cells into lymphoid organs and kidneys, and we therefore describe new pathomechanisms for the CXCL13/CXCR5 axis in SLE.
Abnormal overexpression of CXCL13 is observed in many inflamed tissues and in particular in autoimmune diseases.
The chemokine CXC ligand 13 protein (CXCL13) is reported to closely related to the disease activity and severity of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), moreover, the level of CXCL13 was markedly raised in kidney tissues of lupus nephritis (LN) patients.
Mutations in ADAMTS13, ADAMTS2, ADAMTS10, ADAMTS17, ADAMTSL2 and ADAMTSL4 have been identified in distinct human genetic disorders ranging from thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura to acromelic dysplasia.
Treatment with Ponatinib resulted in an amelioration of the BLM-induced pulmonary fibrosis in rats with reductions of the pathological score, collagen deposition, p-Smad3, Alfa-SMA, PDGF-BB and FGF-2 expression.
This study intends to explore the effects of microRNA-126 (miR-126) on cell proliferation, apoptosis, and tumor angiogenesis in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) by regulating epidermal growth factor-like domain 7 (EGFL7) through extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) signaling.
This study aims to explore the effects of microRNA-126 (miR-126) on tumor proliferation and angiogenesis of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) by targeting EGFL7.
Lately, another angiogenic factor, epidermal growth factor-like domain multiple 7 (EGFL7), has attracted interest due to its possible relationship with hepatocellular carcinoma metastasis.
To evaluate expression of VEGF and EGFL7 in human hepatocellular carcinoma, compared to corresponding cirrhotic surrounding tissue.
While VEGF expression was constant, regardless of tumour differentiation stage and unchanged compared to surrounding cirrhotic tissue, EGFL7 expression increased in less differentiated hepatocellular carcinoma.
The preferential expression of EGFL7 in less differentiated hepatocellular carcinoma compared to VEGF, suggests a possible important role of this angiogenic factor in a later oncogenic and infiltrative/metastatic phase.
Epidermal growth factor-like domain multiple 7 (EGFL7), recently identified as a secreted protein regulated by oxygen exposure, plays a critical role in promoting metastasis of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
This assay detected EGFL7 in lysates of non-small-cell lung cancer and hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines and also hepatocellular carcinoma, breast cancer, and ovarian cancer tissues.
Recent studies have suggested that epidermal growth factor-like domain multiple 7 (EGFL7) is overexpressed by many tumors, such as colorectal cancer and hepatocellular carcinoma; it is also correlated with progression, metastasis, and a poor prognosis.
RT-PCR and Western blot were employed to detect Egfl7 expression in normal adult human tissues and 10 human epithelial tumors including hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), lung cancer, breast cancer, prostate cancer, colorectal cancer, gastric cancer, esophageal cancer, malignant glioma, ovarian cancer and renal cancer.
We describe here the isolation of an EGFL7-specific antibody from a mammalian cell-based full-length antibody display library generated from peripheral blood mononuclear cells of patients with hepatocellular carcinoma.
In a previous study, we reported a critical role of epidermal growth factor-like domain 7 (EGFL7) in the metastasis of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and documented it to be a prognostic biomarker as well as a potential therapeutic target for HCC.
Collectively, our results provide evidence that loss of expression of miR-4516 in psoriatic skin might be contributing to accelerated migration, resistance to apoptosis and differentiation as seen in psoriasis lesional keratinocytes and also highlight its potential as a novel small molecule for therapeutic intervention in psoriasis.
High expression levels of miR-146-5p, miR-199a-5p, miR-199b-5p, miR-1285-5p, miR-1915-3p, and miR-4516, and low miR-148b-3p expression were associated with infiltrative growth of follicular variant of papillary thyroid carcinomas.
We further show that overexpression of hsa-miR-4516 downregulates STAT3, p-STAT3, CDK6, and UBE2N proteins that are consistently upregulated in psoriasis and induces apoptosis in HaCaT cells.
A general defect in napsin A or cathepsin H expression or activity was not the specific cause for abnormal surfactant accumulation in juvenile pulmonary alveolar proteinosis.
Significantly increased activities of cathepsin H and aminopeptidase were detected in BAL fluid from patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), cryptogenic organizing pneumonia (COP), chronic eosinophilic pneumonia (CEP) and hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP).
The function of CpsB, a PHP family protein tyrosine phosphatase from Streptococcus pneumonia, is to regulate biosynthesis of capsular polysaccharide, an important virulence determinant.
Vitreous samples from individuals with exogenous endophthalmitis (n = 18) were analyzed via Luminex assay and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay for the cytokines VEGF-A, tumor necrosis factor (TNF), interleukin 6 (IL-6), IL-8 (chemokine [CXCL]-8), IL-1Beta, IL-10, IL-12p70, IL-33, interferon (IFN)-Gamma, IFN-Alfa, IFN-Beta, chemokine ligand (CCL)-3, IL-2, IL-5, IL-15, CXCL-10, CCL-2, IL-1Ra, CCL-5, IL-17, and CCL-11.
Among four patients with KS carrying a CHD7 mutation, one had perceptive deafness and two had a cleft lip/palate.
We report two brothers of Chinese origin who have an apparently unique syndrome of cleft lip/palate, profound sensorineural deafness, and a sacral lipoma.
Immunofluorescent staining showed that there were cell nuclei stained for c-Fos, c-Myc, and p53, and cytoplasm positive for c-Raf, in the glomeruli of patients with proliferative types of glomerulonephritis, including IgA nephritis and lupus nephritis, and in patients with focal glomerular sclerosis.
The objective of the study was to compare the diagnostic yield of home-made ELISA tests based on synthetic chimeric fibrin/filaggrin citrullinated peptides (CFFCPs) with CCP3 and CCP3.1 commercial tests to detect anti-citrullinated protein/peptide antibodies (ACPAs) in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients.
In the present study, we aimed to estimate the concentrations of cytokines (interleukin 6, IL-6, tumor necrosis factor-Alfa, TNF-Alfa) and auto-antibodies (rheumatoid factor IgM isotype, IgM-RF, antinuclear auto-antibodies, ANA, anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibodies IgG isotype, IgG anti-CCP3.1, anti-cardiolipin IgG isotype, IgG anti-aCL) in serum of patients with eRA (early rheumatoid arthritis) and HCVrA (hepatitis C virus-related arthropathy) and to assess the utility of IL-6, TNF-Alfa together with IgG anti-CCP and IgM-RF in distinguishing between patients with true eRA and HCVrA, in the idea of using them as differential immunomarkers.
Logistic regressions were used to investigate whether using both tests (anti-CCP2 and anti-CCP3) gives a better prediction of rheumatoid arthritis.
Binary logistic regressions indicated that the likelihood of having rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is significantly higher when testing positive on both CCP2 and CCP3 compared to CCP2 or CCP3 alone.
The presence of ACPA was determined by the visually read, qualitative rapid CCPoint(R) test (Euro-Diagnostica, Malmoe, Sweden) compared to routinely used ELISA assays (Immunoscan CCPlus(R)-Euro-Diagnostica, Sweden, and QuantLite(R) CCP3-INOVA Diagnostics Inc., USA), in the sera of 184 patients: early RA(n = 38), established RA (n = 84), inflammatory arthritis(n = 34) and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) (n = 28).
Here we report that oncogenic activation of ERK plays an important role in transcriptional activation of CD47 through nuclear respiratory factor 1 (NRF-1) in melanoma cells.
So these results suggest that NRF-1-mediated regulation of CD47 expression is a novel mechanism by which ERK signalling promotes the pathogenesis of melanoma, and that the combination of CD47 blockade and BRAF/MEK inhibitors may be a useful approach for improving their therapeutic efficacy.
We reported that ERAlfa increases nuclear respiratory factor-1 (NRF-1), which regulates nuclear-encoded mitochondrial gene transcription, in MCF-7 breast cancer cells and NRF-1 knockdown stimulates apoptosis.
Whether NRF-1 and target gene expression is altered in endocrine resistant breast cancer cells is unknown.
Mechanistically, nutritional deficiencies could reduce hypoxia-inducible factor Alfa (HIF-1Alfa) protein expression to increase C-MYC protein level, which in turn increased nuclear respiratory factor 1 (NRF1) and mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) transcription to enhance the activity of OXPHOS, suggesting that metabolic reprogramming by the changes of microenvironment during the carcinogenesis can provide some novel therapeutic clues to traditional cancer treatments.
Here we show how ROS through a novel redox signalling pathway involving nuclear respiratory factor-1 (NRF-1) and p27 contribute to E2-induced growth of MCF-7 breast cancer cells.
We identified a missense mutation arginine 33 to glutamine (R33Q) in CD300f by direct sequencing of exon 2 in peripheral blood samples from 50 patients with multiple sclerosis (MS).
CD300f -/- mice were protected from death after cecal ligation and puncture (CLP), a murine model of septic peritonitis.
Here we identify the critical role of CD300f in inhibiting LPS-induced skin inflammation.
Thus, ceramide-CD300f binding inhibits LPS-induced skin inflammation, implicating CD300f as a negative regulator of Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) signaling in vivo.
The aim of the present auto-commentary is to highlight recent findings regarding the Cd300lf and Cd300lb receptors and their emerging roles in the development of autoimmune disease.
CD300f (CLM-1) is a phosphatidylserine receptor known to positively regulate efferocytosis by macrophages, and CD300f gene-deficient mice are predisposed to develop a lupus-like disease.
The consequences are the expansion of memory T cells and increased ANA levels in aged CD300f-deficient mice, which predispose CD300f-deficient mice to develop an overt autoimmune disease when exposed to an overload of apoptotic cells, or an exacerbated autoimmunity when combined with FcGammaRIIB deficiency.
Anaemia was categorized as severe (Hb &lt;7 g/dL), moderate (Hb 7-9.9 g/dL) or mild (Hb 10-10.9 g/dL).
Thrombocytopenia is a common adverse event in cancer patients treated with antibody-drug conjugates (ADC), including AGS-16C3F, an ADC targeting ENPP3 (ectonucleotide pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterase-3) and trastuzumab emtansine (T-DM1).
In this study, we investigated induction of B 10 cell's IL-10 competency in vitro and its effect on ligature-induced experimental periodontitis in vivo.
Although both luminal-like subtypes were associated with increased androgen receptor expression and signaling, only luminal B prostate cancers were significantly associated with postoperative response to androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) in a subset analysis in our retrospective cohorts (n = 315) matching patients based on clinicopathologic variables (luminal B 10-year metastasis: treated, 33% vs untreated, 55%; nonluminal B 10-year metastasis: treated, 37% vs untreated, 21%; P = .006 for interaction).
We investigated the function and possible mechanisms of KPNA2 involved in rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
Analysis of expression profiling experiments of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) demonstrates statistically significant KPNA1-, NLRP1- and NLRP3-gene expression phenotypes associated with human genotypes of Crohn's disease (CD), Huntington's disease (HD) and rheumatoid arthritis (RA) populations.
In Astrocytoma, IDH-mutant, PIK3R1 mutations (P = 0.0014) and altered retinoblastoma pathway genes (RB1, CDKN2A, and CDK4) (P = 0.013) were independent predictors of poor survival.
We evaluated immunohistochemical expression of CDKN1B, CDKN1A, CDKN2A, CDK2, CDK4, CDK6, cyclin D1, cyclin E1, and phosphorylated retinoblastoma protein (phospho-RB1) in a cohort of 267 patients with NETs.
The cyclin D-cyclin dependent kinase (CDK) 4/6-inhibitor of CDK4 (INK4)-retinoblastoma (Rb) pathway plays a crucial role in cell cycle progression and its dysregulation is an important contributor to endocrine therapy resistance.
The pathways for the proteins p53/p21 and p16Ink4a/retinoblastoma protein are important for irreversible growth arrest and senescent cells.
We suggest that the efficacy of recombinant interferon alpha-C in a low-dose regime versus other types of interferon as first-line therapy for inoperable, metastatic, or locally recurrent renal cell carcinoma should be investigated in a prospective, controlled, randomized study.
Five out of 38 patients (13%) with metastatic renal cell carcinoma had mental deterioration 3 weeks to 13 months after the start of treatment with recombinant interferon alpha-C. Metastatic spread to the brain, paraneoplastic effect of the tumor on the central nervous system and other causes of dementia were excluded.
The pharmacokinetics of rIFN alpha-C were studied in 11 patients with metastatic renal-cell carcinoma.
A 75-year-old patient with metastatic renal cell carcinoma was treated with recombinant interferon alpha-C and thereafter developed a neurologic syndrome of dementia, ataxia, confusional state, loss of concentration ability and cortical blindness.
Taken together, these findings revealed the first evidence that Nur77 was an important modulator in microglia function that associated with microglia-mediated dopaminergic neurotoxicity, and thus modulation of Nur77 may represent a potential novel target for treatment for neurodegenerative disease.
Chromatography of 4-S-CAP on an affinity column (both CH- and CNBr-activated Sepharose 4B) identified a 58 kD protein in melanoma cells, which was present at very low levels in HeLa cells; this 58 kD protein was retained by both 4-S- and 2-S-CAP affinity columns, but not by columns of a phenolic thioether (cysteinylphenol: CP) or a phenolic thioether amide (N-acetyl-4-S-CAP), and could be retrieved by either 4-S or 2-S-CAP but not by CP and N-acetyl-4-S-CAP.
SOX3 and TDGF-1 were up-regulated in human glioma tissues and GSCs.
This study is the first to demonstrate that the SOX2OT-miR-194-5p/miR-122-SOX3-TDGF-1 pathway forms a positive feedback loop and regulates the biological behaviors of GSCs, and these findings might provide a novel strategy for glioma treatment.
Self-renewal factor Sox3 induces epithelial-mesenchymal transition at gastrulation and is also involved epithelial-mesenchymal transition in several cancers.
We intended to determine the roles of Sox3 in inducing epithelial-mesenchymal transition in endometrial cancer stem cells and the possible role of microRNA-194 in controlling Sox3 expression.
Firstly, we found that Sox3 and microRNA-194 expressions were associated with the status of endometrial cancer stem cells in a panel of endometrial carcinoma tissue, the CD133+ cell was higher in tumorsphere than in differentiated cells, and overexpression of microRNA-194 would decrease CD133+ cell expression.
Silencing of Sox3 in endometrial cancer stem cell upregulated the epithelial marker E-cadherin, downregulated the mesenchymal marker vimentin, and significantly reduced cell invasion in vitro; overexpression of Sox3 reversed these phenotypes.
These findings demonstrate the novel mechanism by which Sox3 contributes to endometrial cancer stem cell invasion and suggest that repression of Sox3 by microRNA-194 may have therapeutic potential to suppress endometrial carcinoma metastasis.
The transcription factor sex-determining region Y-box protein 3 (SOX3) plays important roles in various types of cancer.
However, the clinical significance of SOX3 in human ovarian cancer remains elusive, and the identity of SOX3 in ovarian cancer initiation, progression, and the related underlying mechanism is unknown.
Subsequently, we found that overexpression of SOX3 in EOC cells promoted proliferation, migration, and invasion, while restrained apoptosis and adhesion of ovarian cancer cells.
A liver targeting moiety is incorporated in GHDx so as to improve the therapeutic efficiency and decrease adverse effects of conventional cancer therapy.
Since it was previously proposed that increased SOXB2 proteins level interfere with the activity of SOXB1 counteracting partners, we compared expression patterns of SOXB members during retinoic acid induction of embryonal carcinoma cells.
Data presented here provide an insight into SOX14 expression during in vitro neural differentiation of embryonal carcinoma cells and demonstrate the effect of its ectopic expression on protein levels of SOXB members in HeLa cells.
This is a report of a very rare case of Schwartz Jampel syndrome, with few unusual findings, in a 13 years girl from Nepal, who concurrently also had superotemporal subluxation of the crystalline lens along with blepharophimosis syndrome.
The manifestations of SJS include short stature, blepharophimosis, and skeletal anomalies.
Schwartz-Jampel syndrome (SJS) is a rare congenital disorder of continuous myotonia, causing visual and eyelid problems such as blepharospasm, acquired ptosis, and blepharophimosis.
Schwartz Jampel syndrome is a usually recessive disorder that presents myotonia, skeletal (bone dysplasia) and facial (blepharophimosis) anomalies and low height, which is diagnosed in childhood.
Schwartz-Jampel syndrome is a disorder of continuous myotonia causing blepharospasm, acquired ptosis, and blepharophimosis.
Two patients with Schwartz-Jampel syndrome presented with blepharospasm, acquired ptosis, and blepharophimosis.
Macrophage polykaryons, but not osteoclasts, expressed CD14 and HLA-DR. CD51+/CD14-/HLA-DR-/CD163- giant cells were noted in all giant-cell lesions of bone, including giant cell tumour of bone, aneurysmal bone cyst, non-ossifying fibroma, chondroblastoma, telangiectatic osteosarcoma, chondromyxoid fibroma, Langerhans cell histiocytosis and brown tumour.
3.81% of the GBL constituted for neoplastic lesions of which 75% were GBC.
Moreover, loss of critical ubiquitination residues in GBetaL, by either K305R/K313R mutations or a melanoma-associated GBetaL(DeltaW297) truncation, leads to elevated mTORC2 formation, which facilitates tumorigenesis, in part by activating AKT oncogenic signalling.
Other genes found to be differentially expressed at day 35 included v-akt murine thymoma viral oncogene homolog, eukaryotic translation elongation factor 2, eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E binding protein 1, 3-phosphoinositide dependent protein kinase-1, ribosomal protein S6 kinase, 70 kDa, polypeptide 1 (RPS6KP1), avTOR associated protein, LST8 homolog, ghrelin, phosphoinositide-3-kinase (PI3K), forkhead box O1, and p53 E3 ubiquitin protein ligase homolog (MDM2).
Glioblastoma multiforme (GBL) is the most common and aggressive brain neoplasm.
In this study, we found that the expression of mLST8, a required subunit of both mTOR complex 1 (mTORC1) and complex 2 (mTORC2), was upregulated in several human colon and prostate cancer cell lines and tissues.
Knockdown of mLST8 significantly suppressed mTORC1 and mTORC2 complex formation, and it also inhibited tumor growth and invasiveness in human colon carcinoma (HCT116) and prostate cancer (LNCaP) cells.
mLST8 knockdown reduced mTORC2-mediated phosphorylation of AKT in both cancer and normal cells, whereas it potently inhibited mTORC1-mediated phosphorylation of 4E-BP1 specifically in cancer cells.
These results suggest that mLST8 plays distinct roles in normal and cancer cells, depending upon its expression level, and that mLST8 upregulation may contribute to tumor progression by constitutively activating both the mTORC1 and mTORC2 pathways.
The DeltaatfA and DeltaatfB were shown to be avirulent and to have attenuated virulence, respectively, in both Galleria mellonella and a neutropenic murine model of invasive pulmonary aspergillosis.
We observed genetic variation in RPS6KA1, RPS6KA2, and PRS6KB2 were associated with risk of developing colon cancer while only genetic variation in RPS6KA2 was associated with altering risk of rectal cancer.
These findings suggest that NO-cGMP-PKG signaling in the NTS can modify the acquisition of conditioned hypoglycemia, and suggests that this nucleus directly participates in this reflex.
Finally, genetic instability is investigated in CD34+ cells of a patient with acute myeloid leukemia by immunofluorescence microscopy of GammaH2AX and 53BP1.
The aims of this study were to determine whether BCCIP deficiency contributes to mammary tumorigenesis, especially for a subset of breast cancers with 53BP1 abnormality, and to reveal the mechanistic implications of BCCIP in breast cancer interventions.
We analyzed the BCCIP protein level in 470 cases of human breast cancer to determine the associations between BCCIP and 53BP1, p53, and subtypes of breast cancer.
The downregulation of BCCIP is mutually exclusive with p53 mutations but concurrent with 53BP1 loss in triple-negative breast cancer.
Using secondary assays for detection of senescence biomarkers p21, 53BP1 and senescence associated beta-galactosidase (SABetaGal) in a panel of HCT116 cell lines carrying cancer-relevant mutations, we show that partial senescence phenotypes can be induced to varying degrees in a context dependent manner, even in the absence of p21 or p53 expression.
Our data exhibit that cancer-related genes ANK3, HACD4, TP53BP1, MFN1, LCMT2, RNMT, TRMT6, METTL8 and METTL16 harbor mutational ITH as well as the frameshift mutations in CRC with MSI-H. Also, the results suggest that frameshift mutations of these genes might play a role in tumorigenesis through their inactivation in CRC.
This study was designed to compare the performance of eight patients (five males, three females, mean age +/- SD: 63.7+/-7.9 years) at early stage of unilateral thalamic lesions and eleven healthy controls (six males, five females, 49.6+/-12.2 years) in neurocognitive tests (CogState Battery: Groton Maze Learning Test, GML; Groton Maze Learning Test-Delayed Recall, GML-DR; Detection Task, DT; Identification Task, IT; One Card Learning Task, OCLT; One Back Task, OBT; Two Back Task, TBT; Set-Shifting Task, S-ST) and other well-known tests (Benton Visual Retention Test, BVRT; California Verbal Learning Test, CVLT; The Rey-Osterrieth Complex Figure Test, ROCF; Trail Making Test, TMT part A and B; Color - Word Stroop Task, CWST; Verbal Fluency Test, VFT), and social cognitive tasks (The Penn Emotion Recognition Test, ER40; Penn Emotion Discrimination Task, EmoDiff40; The Penn Emotional Acuity Test, PEAT40; Reading the Mind in the Eyes Test, revised version II; Toronto Alexithymia Scale, TAS-20).
RT-PCR (reverse transcription-PCR) analysis of spinal cord samples showed that both sst4 (somatostatin receptor 4) and sst2 receptor mRNA, but not myOR (my-opiate receptor) and NK1 (neurokinin-1) receptor mRNA, were down-regulated following BFP treatment, thus implicating somatostatin involvement in BFP-induced analgesia.
In addition, we identified the SSTR1 receptor as a novel pharmacologic target for somatostatin-mediated peripheral analgesia in inflammatory pain.
Overweight participants lost 1.1 kg less (p &lt; 0.01) than participants with class-I obesity and 1.5 kg less (p &lt; 0.01) than participants with class-II obesity.
The present study investigated the relationship between the expression of miR-146a and miR-146b with the occurrence and prognosis of papillary thyroid carcinoma.
Carcinoma samples were obtained from each patient, and adjacent tissues were used as control samples to determine expression levels of miR-146a and miR146b by semi-quantitative RT-PCR.
Our results showed that the expression levels of miR-146a and miR-146b in carcinoma tissues were significantly higher than the levels in cancer-free tissues (p&lt;0.01).
Based on our findings, the expression of miR-146a and miR-146b correlates with the occurrence and prognosis of papillary thyroid carcinoma, and the expression levels of miR-146a and miR-146b seem to affect the cell proliferation and migration and regulate the expression of IRAK1 protein in cancer cells.
In this study, we evaluated the possible interaction between miR-146a and one of its putative targets ribonuclease L (RNASEL) in the risk of sporadic melanoma.
Polymorphisms rs2910164 in miR-146a and rs486907 in the RNASEL gene have both independently been associated with the risk of different cancers, and an interaction between them has been observed in nonmelanoma skin cancer.
The results reported in the present study suggest a sex-specific interaction between miR-146a and RNASEL genes in melanoma skin cancer susceptibility, and could account for possible discordant results in association studies when stratification according to sex is not performed.
In the stratified analyses by sex, the associations between miR-499 rs3746444 and miR-146a rs2910164 polymorphisms with the susceptibility of oral squamous cell cancer were significant in males.
These findings suggest that miR-499 rs3746444 and miR-146a rs2910164 polymorphisms may contribute to genetic susceptibility to oral squamous cell cancer.
In the present study, we find that the expression of miR-146a was decreased in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) tissues compared with corresponding adjacent tissues, and the expression level in HCC cell lines was lower than in a normal liver cell.
We also discovered that miR-146a may represent a novel potential candidate of the HCC carcinoma diagnostic marker in the long term.
Our previous study found that dysregulated microRNA-146a-5p (miR-146a-5p) is involved in oesophageal squamous cell cancer (ESCC) proliferation.
Analysis of miR-146a expression in a series of 59 penile squamous cell carcinomas (PSCCs) showed that its levels were lower in high-risk HPV-positive than in HPV-negative PSCCs and inversely correlated with expression of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), a known target for miR-146a.
Ectopic expression of miR-146a decreased expression of EGFR and inhibited proliferation of keratinocytes and cervical carcinoma cells.
Using a melanoma progression model, miR-146a was identified as a key double-acting player in melanoma malignancy.
It was determined that miR-146a coordinated melanoma cell growth by its direct targets lunatic fringe (LFNG) and NUMB, which operate on the NOTCH/PTEN/Akt pathway; while inhibition of metastasis formation was linked to decreased expression of ITGAV and ROCK1.
Relevantly, miR-146a expression correlated with melanoma recurrence and was enriched in both patient-derived melanoma and cutaneous metastasis specimens, while its direct targets were depleted.
This study reconciles the contradictory biologic functions of miR-146a in melanoma progression and unravels distinct molecular mechanisms that need to be considered for therapeutic interventions.
miR-146a controls melanoma progression in a dual way, promoting growth and inhibiting dissemination; however, it is poorly expressed in CTCs, resulting in overall tumor spreading and distant-site colonization.
E2F3 is a transcription factor that has been shown to be overexpressed in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
These results suggest that E2F3b functions as an important promoter for cell proliferation and plays important roles in transcriptional regulation in HepG2 liver cancer cells.
Expression of a panel of seven microRNAs (hsa-miR-34a, hsa-miR-16, hsa-miR-17, hsa-miR-21, hsa-miR-221, hsa-miR-326, and hsa-miR-375) and seven target genes ( E2F3, PI3KCA, TOM34, WNT5A, PDCD4, DFFA, and EGFR) in 43 glioblastoma multiforme specimens were profiled compared to non-cancer tissues via quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction.
Our data demonstrated a significant upregulation of five microRNAs (hsa-miR-16, hsa-miR-17, hsa-miR-21, hsa-miR-221, and hsa-miR-375), three genes ( E2F3, PI3KCA, and Wnt5a), two proteins (VEGFA and BCL2), and downregulation of hsa-miR-34a and three other genes ( DFFA, PDCD4, and EGFR) in brain cancer tissues.
E2F3, as an oncogene, may promote NSCLC progression.
These results suggested that NEAT1 may promote the development of NSCLC through the miR-377-3p-E2F3 pathway.
Alterations in E2F3 functions correspond with poor prognosis in various cancers, underscoring their status for the clinical cancer phenotype.
Current understanding of the reciprocal link between E2F3 and miRNAs in human cancers were summarized, which could help to develop potential therapeutic strategies.
The E2F3 transcriptional regulatory pathway plays a major part in multiple-cancer progression, but the specific contributions of this pathway to tumor formation and the progression of clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) are not fully understood.
We evaluated the dehiscence and fenestration presence in maxillary and mandibular anterior teeth of patients affected by bilateral cleft lip and palate (BCLP) and compared the findings with a well-matched control group of noncleft patients using cone-beam computed tomography.
Sample included 15 non-cleft (NC), 15 unilateral cleft lip and palate (UCLP) and 15 bilateral cleft lip and palate (BCLP) cases whose age were between 15 to 17.
The aim of this study was to evaluate the facial profile esthetics of rehabilitated children with complete bilateral cleft lip and palate (BCLP), comparing the judgment of professionals related and not related to cleft rehabilitation and laypersons.
To evaluate the maxillary alveolar repositioning of the infants with bilateral cleft lip and palate (BCLP) undergoing computer-aided nasoalveolar molding (CAD-NAM).
Clefts were classified as right/left unilateral cleft lip and palate (UCLP), bilateral cleft lip and palate (BCLP) and cleft palate (CP).
Four FEMs of unilateral cleft lip and palate (UCLP) or bilateral cleft lip and palate (BCLP) patients' cranio-maxillary complex with MA and TA were established.
Blepharocheilodontic (BCD) syndrome is a rare condition characterized by bilateral cleft lip and palate (BCLP), eyelid abnormalities, and oligodontia.
To test the hypotheses that there are differences between orthodontists, individuals with cleft lip and palate (CLP) and laypersons in the visual perception of faces with unilateral (UCLP) and bilateral cleft lip and palate (BCLP), the faces with UCLP and BCLP are visually perceived differently and the hierarchy of visual attention changes when viewing individuals with CLP.
The purpose of this "two-arm parallel" trial was to compare the orthopedic, dental, and alveolar bone plate changes of slow (SME) and rapid (RME) maxillary expansions in patients with complete bilateral cleft lip and palate (BCLP).
These included known adverse events: gastrointestinal discomfort, breast tenderness, reduced libido, dry skin (flutamide and finasteride); irregular bleeding (spironolactone); nausea, diarrhoea, bloating (metformin); hot flushes, decreased libido, vaginal dryness, headaches (gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) analogues)).Clinician's evaluation of hirsutism and change in androgen levels were addressed in most comparisons, change in body mass index (BMI) and improvement of other clinical signs of hyperandrogenism in one-third of studies.The quality of evidence was moderate to very low for most outcomes.There was low quality evidence for the effect of two oral contraceptive pills (OCPs) (ethinyl estradiol + cyproterone acetate versus ethinyl estradiol + desogestrel) on change from baseline of Ferriman-Gallwey scores.
Plasma and sera from 3 patients suffering from either enteric dysmotility, irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) or gastroparesis were analysed for C-reactive protein (CRP), and for GnRH antibodies and soluble CD40 by ELISA methods.
We found statistically significant differences (P &lt; 0.01) between the healthy volunteers and patients with severe periodontitis in the following genes; gonadotropin-releasing hormone 1 (GNRH1), phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase regulatory 1 (PIK3R1), dipeptidylpeptidase 4 (DPP4), fibrinogen-like 2 (FGL2), and calcitonin receptor (CALCR).
These results suggest that SNPs in the GNRH1, PIK3R1, DPP4, FGL2, and CALCR genes are genomic markers for severe periodontitis.
Pharmacological inhibition of different signaling pathways and genetic knockdown of Notch-2 further revealed JNK as an upstream effector of Notch-2 in TGF-Beta1-mediated renal fibrosis.
Consistently, we also demonstrated that administration of TSA or a Gamma-secretase inhibitor RO4929097 in the mouse model of unilateral ureteral obstruction significantly ameliorated renal fibrosis through suppression of the JNK/Notch-2 signaling activation.
Although, renal abnormalities are considered an integral part of the HJCYS, published reports on ESRD are scarce.
Here we show that Notch2 prevents podocyte loss and nephrosis.
Administration of a Notch2 agonistic monoclonal antibody ameliorates proteinuria and glomerulosclerosis in a mouse model of nephrosis and focal segmental glomerulosclerosis.
Hence, specific activation of Notch2 rescues damaged podocytes and activating Notch2 may represent a novel clinical strategy for the amelioration of nephrosis and glomerulosclerosis.
To investigate the effect of both fermented Cordyceps powder (CS) and prednisone on the Notch2/hes-1 signaling activation in the kidney tubules of rats with acute aristolochic acid nephropathy (AAAN).
The role of NOTCH2 and JAG1 in formation of proximal nephron structures and podocytes might explain the observed phenotypes of renal dysplasia and proteinuria in patients with Alagille syndrome, and renal tubular acidosis may be the result of JAG1 expression in the collecting ducts.
We compared 25-hydroxyvitamin D and parathyroid hormone (PTH) levels between four groups of non-lactating women who gave birth within 12 months before the beginning of the study: hypothyroid women with post-partum thyroiditis (group A; n = 14), euthyroid females with post-partum thyroiditis (group B; n = 14), women with non-autoimmune hypothyroidism (group C; n = 16) and healthy euthyroid females without thyroid autoimmunity (group D; n = 15).
Serum levels of 25-hydroxyvitamin D were lower, while PTH higher in patients with post-partum thyroiditis than in patients without thyroid autoimmunity.
They were also lower (25-hydroxyvitamin D) or higher (PTH) in group A than in group B, as well as in group C in comparison with group D. L-thyroxine treatment increased 25-hydroxyvitamin D and reduced PTH levels only in hypothyroid women with post-partum thyroiditis.
In comparing PTH deficient patients (group 1) with patients in group 2, there were no differences in age, gender, thyroid pathology, the incidence of thyroiditis, or other factors that would predict hypoparathyroidism.
This study was performed to investigate the levels of platelet activation marker SCUBE-1 and sCD40L which plays some role in the progression of atherosclerosis, in patients with hypothyroidism due to Hashimoto's thyroiditis.
Hypothyroidism due to Hashimoto's thyroiditis in comparison to the control group that includes healthy volunteers; SCUBE-1 and sCD40L, were increased.
SCUBE-1 and sCD40L levels were increased in Hashimoto's hypothyroidism patients.
There has been no study evaluating SCUBE1 levels in patients with overt hyperthyroidism (OHyper) and subclinical hyperthyroidism (SHyper), conditions which are known to show impairment of both endothelial and platelet function.
SCUBE1 may be used as a reliable marker of endothelial damage in hyperthyroidism, especially in the subclinical period.
We report a new case for consanguineous parents with homozygous novel mutation in GLIS3 gene who presented with neonatal diabetes mellitus, severe resistant congenital hypothyroidism, cholestatic liver disease, bilateral congenital glaucoma and facial dysmorphism.
A total of 4687 patients without preexisting diabetes (age 2-20 years, 2004-2010) surviving with a functioning transplant for longer than 1 year with at least one follow-up report were identified from the OPTN/UNOS database as of September 2014.
Microcephaly with simplified gyration, epilepsy and permanent neonatal diabetes syndrome (MEDS) is a recently described, autosomal recessive-inherited syndrome.
Motor improvement was evaluated using Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) III scores in stim ON/meds OFF in comparison with preoperative scores.
Minimally efficacious doses (MEDs) in epilepsy were compared to doses in the POP trials that produced 50-100% response (ED50-100).
A syndrome of permanent neonatal diabetes along with primary microcephaly with simplified gyral pattern associated with severe infantile epileptic encephalopathy was recently described in two independent reports in which disease-causing homozygous mutations were identified in the immediate early response-3 interacting protein-1 (IER3IP1) gene.
Although association between gene polymorphisms in EPHX1 and TNF-a genes and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) have been found but till date no genetic association studies have been done in the COPD affected Kazakhstan population.
To explore whether the tagging single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within EPHX1 gene were involved in the genetic susceptibility to coal worker's pneumoconiosis (CWP) by case-control study.
Microsomal epoxide hydrolase (EPHX1) is an enzyme involved in the detoxification the products of smoking and is proposed to be a genetic factor for the development of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
We found that rats with diabetes had significantly higher abundance of the Protein disulfide isomerase associated 3, Aspartoacylase-3,3-hydroxymethyl-3-methylglutaryl-Coenzyme A lyase, Lactamase beta 2 and Agmat protein.
The aim of this study was to evaluate the association between the noggin rs227731 polymorphism on chromosome 17q22 and risk of nonsyndromic cleft lip with or without palate (NSCL/P).
Our findings demonstrate multiple roles of Noggin in different domains for craniofacial skeletogenesis, and suggest an indirect mechanism for secondary cleft palate in Nog mutants that may be relevant to human cleft palate as well.
In turn, four variables were found to be associated with decreased mortality rates: treatment of benign prostatic hypertrophy, treatment of dyslipidemia, IGF-1 and being female.
Several other T2DM-related pathophysiological changes, e.g., osteoblast insulin resistance, impaired productions of osteogenic growth factors (particularly insulin-like growth factor 1 and bone morphogenetic proteins), overproduction of pro-inflammatory cytokines, hyperglycemia, and dyslipidemia, also aggravate diabetic osteopathy.
In synaptosomes, amyloid-Beta (ABeta) oligomers, the causative agent in Alzheimer's disease, bind to cellular prion proteins (PrPC) resulting in increased cholesterol concentrations, translocation of cytoplasmic phospholipase A2 (cPLA2, also known as PLA2G4A) to lipid rafts, and activation of cPLA2 The formation of ABeta-PrPC complexes is controlled by the cholesterol ester cycle.
To investigate the effect of lithium on cytosolic phospholipase A2 (PLA2) activity, a key player on membrane phospholipid turnover which has been found to be reduced in blood and brain tissue of patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD).
We covered an introduction to sphingomyelinases and its enzymatic product ceramide, in membrane domains or lipid rafts and the nucleus; followed by crosstalk between sphingomyelinase and cytosolic phospholipase A2 (cPLA2) catalysed products including arachidonic acid, functions of acid sphingomyelinase (aSMase) and neutral sphingomyelinase (N-SMase) in neurons, neuronal progenitor cells, glial cells, and brain endothelial cells; alterations in acid and N-SMases in Niemann Pick Disease Type A, major depression, Alzheimer's disease, cerebral ischemia, and pain; and recent developments in identification of inhibitors to sphingomyelinases.
Healthy brain aging does not show upregulation of PLA2G4 or PTGS2 expression, which was found in Alzheimer's disease.
In the present study, circulating proportions of CD8(+) T (Tc) cell subsets, including IL-17 (Tc17) and IL-10 (Tc10) producing cells, were assessed in relapsing-remitting MS (RRMS) patients and a possible effect of beta interferon (IFN-Beta), glatiramer acetate (GA), and vitamin D (VitD) on these cell subsets was investigated.
We show that both Tc17 and Tc10 cell fractions are elevated in the circulation of RRMS patients in remission compared to healthy subjects and that these Tc subsets remain unaffected by current immune modulating regimens.
Several lines of evidence implicate cytosolic phospholipase A(2)Alfa (cPLA(2)Alfa) as a critical enzyme in inflammatory disorders, including rheumatoid arthritis.
Human group IIA-secreted phospholipase A(2) (sPLA(2)-IIA) is an important regulator of cytokine-mediated inflammatory responses in both in vitro and in vivo models of rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
We have therefore been unable to confirm a potential role for lysosomal cathepsins in the characteristic neurodegeneration associated with Alzheimer's disease; however the finding of significant increases in activity of dipeptidyl aminopeptidase II, cathepsin H and cathepsin D specifically in cases with Huntington's disease is of particular note.
Moreover, in vitro cell culture experiments revealed the expression alternations of Mapk10, Jun, Vegfb, Pik3r5, Pld1, Tek, Itga6 exposed to TPF treatment by qRT-PCR, whilst providing an insight into the mechanism underlying TPF chemotherapeutic response in LSCC.
Patients with refractory hyperaldosteronism (n = 41, 38%, with plasma concentration &gt;180 ng/l, URL, median 283 ng/l, interquartile range 218-433), when compared with those without (106 ng/l, 74-144; P &lt; 0.001), were not different either for treatment or LVEF, while presented with different AGT M235T genotype distribution (P = 0.047).
Among polymorphisms, only AGT M235T (P = 0.038) was associated with refractory hyperaldosteronism, after adjustment for nongenetic variables.
In conclusion, refractory hyperaldosteronism in heart failure may be influenced by AGT M235T polymorphism, among RAAS candidate genes, and by PRA, which may represent, respectively, a constitutive (genotype dependent) and a nongenetic (phenotype-dependent) trigger for aldosterone elevation.
The BrGR-expressing yeast strain induced the activation of metabolic enzymes (Hxt, G6PDH, GAPDH and Ald), antioxidant systems (Gpx, Trx2, Trx3, Trr1, Tsa1 and porin) and molecular chaperones (Hsp104, Hsp90, Hsp70, Hsp42, Hsp26, Grp, Sti1 and Zpr1), which led to lower oxidative protein damage after a reduction in the level of cellular ROS in the BrGR-expressing yeast strain exposed to H(2)O(2) than in the wild-type yeast strain.
In this investigation, we explored the role of cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) in the regulation of the tumor microenvironment in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) though a complex intercellular BDNF-TrkB signaling system.
The aims of this study were to review the literature concerning the role of BDNF/TrkB activation in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma and malignant salivary gland tumors and to discuss future perspectives of BDNF/TrkB-target therapy.
More recently, TrkB was found to be overexpressed in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) and to be involved in multistep tumour progression.
Further studies should investigate possible inhibitors of TrkB and their suitability for the treatment of head and neck cancer.
The current study evaluates long-term quality of life (QOL) and sexual function of patients with endometrial cancer who received adjuvant pelvic external beam radiotherapy (EBRT) and/or vaginal brachytherapy (BRT).
To investigate dosimetric effects of bladder distention on organs at risk (OARs) during treatment of endometrial cancer using 3D image-based planning of postoperative vaginal vault brachytherapy (BRT).
Fifteen patients with early-stage endometrial cancer were studied, each undergoing adjuvant BRT of vaginal vault via 3.5 cm diameter cylinder.
We investigated 174 patients with endometrial carcinoma treated with external radiotherapy (RT) and brachytherapy (BRT) (101 patients, 58%) or BRT alone (73 patients, 42%).
To correlate comorbidity and acute radiation toxicity in elderly patients treated with adjuvant external beam radiotherapy (EBRT) plus brachytherapy-high dose rate (HDR-BRT) for endometrial cancer (EC).
The aim of our study was to present the experience of our department in the treatment of endometrial cancer with postoperative external beam radiotherapy (EBRT) without intracavitary brachytherapy (BRT) and to evaluate the efficacy of such a method.
We retrospectively retrieved the medical records of all patients with endometrial cancer treated with surgery and EBRT alone (median dose 50.0 Gy).
EBRT without BRT achieved an excellent local control in women with endometrial cancer although some of them were candidates for supplementary BRT.
MiR-744 is aberrantly expressed in different types of human cancer.
However, the expression pattern and biological roles of miR-744 in gastric cancer remain unknown.
The present study demonstrated that miR-744 expression was low in gastric cancer tissues and cell lines.
Low expression levels of miR-744 was significantly correlated with lymph node metastasis, invasive depth and TNM staging in gastric cancer patients.
Bioinformatic prediction, luciferase reporter assay, reverse transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction and western blot analysis verified that brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) is a direct target of miR-744 in gastric cancer cells.
Furthermore, BDNF was upregulated in gastric cancer tissues and inversely correlated with miR-744 expression.
Furthermore, enforced BDNF expression reversed the tumor-suppressing effects of miR-744 on the proliferation and invasion of gastric cancer cells, indicating that BDNF is a functional mediator of miR-744 in gastric cancer.
The present study suggests that miR-744 is a potential prognostic biomarker and treatment target in gastric cancer patients.
Results: Expressions of hsa-mir-1180, hsa-mir-149, hsa-mir-744 and hsa-mir-940 were all up regulated in high invasion capable cell lines (SNU423, SNU449) and vascular invasion patients with hepatocellular carcinoma (logFC&gt;1, P&lt;0.05).
Conclusion: With TCGA and GEO data mining, we found that hsa-mir-1180, hsa-mir-149, hsa-mir-744 and hsa-mir-940 were all highly related to the prognosis of hepatocellular carcinoma, that enabled it to be used to further study the biomarkers related to the prognosis of hepatocellular carcinoma.
#目#的#： #通#过#对GEO (Gene Expression Omnibus) #与TCGA (The Cancer Genome Atlas) #数#据#库#分#析, #挖#掘#肝#癌#血#管#侵#袭#相#关#的microRNA, #并#分#析#其#预#后#和#可#能#机#制#。 #方#法#： #利#用GEO#数#据#库#获#得#肝#癌#血#管#侵#袭microRNA#芯#片#数#据 (GSE67140) , #对5#种#侵#袭#能#力#不#同#的#细#胞#系 (SNU423#、SNU449#、HepG2#、Hep3B#、SNU398) #表#达#谱#进#行#差#异#分#析, #并#在81#份#血#管#侵#袭#阳#性#组#织#样#本#与91#份#血#管#侵#袭#阴#性#组#织#样#本#中#验#证#差#异#分#析#结#果#。#结#合TCGA#数#据#库#中362#例#肝#癌#病#例#数#据#分#析#其#预#后, #并#对microRNA#所#调#控#的#基#因#进#行GO#与KEGG#分#析#。 #结#果#： hsa-mir-1180#、hsa-mir-149#、hsa-mir-744#、hsa-mir-940#在#侵#袭#能#力#强#的#肝#癌#细#胞#和#有#血#管#侵#袭#的#肝#癌#组#织#中#表#达#上#调 (logFC&gt;1, P&lt;0.05) #。#生#存#分#析#显#示, hsa-mir-1180 (HR=1.623, 95%CI#：1.114~2.365, P=0.012) #、hsa-mir-149 (HR=2.400, 95% CI#：1.639~3.514, P&lt;0.001) #、hsa-mir-744 (HR=1.679, 95%CI#：1.161~2.427, P=0.006) #、hsa-mir-940 (HR=1.704, 95%CI#：1.188~2.443, P=0.004) #是#肝#癌#病#例#预#后#独#立#危#险#因#素, #高#表#达#与#患#者#生#存#期#缩#短#显#著#相#关 (P&lt;0.05) #。GO#与KEGG#分#析#其#机#制#可#能#与#免#疫#反#应#、#细#胞#黏#附#、#紧#密#连#接#等#信#号#通#路#有#关#。 #结#论#： #通#过#对TCGA#与GEO#数#据#库#的#挖#掘, #初#步#发#现hsa-mir-1180#、hsa-mir-149#、hsa-mir-744#、hsa-mir-940#对#肝#癌#的#预#后#有#影#响, #可#作#为#肝#癌#预#后#的#生#物#标#志#物#。.
However, little is known about how miR-744 impacts on the tumorigenesis of human prostate cancer.
The aim of this study was to investigate the role of miR-222, miR-29a, miR-34a, miR-130a, miR-90b, miR-200b, miR-452, miR-197, miR-138, miR-210, miR-423, miR-4298, miR-4644, miR-139, miR-1246, miR-1268a, miR-140, miR-149, miR-3178, miR-3613, miR-4258, miR-574, miR-671, miR-6780b, miR-7107, miR-744 and miR-7847 linked to drug resistance in breast cancer formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissues and the association of prognosis with miRNAs, thus providing effective targets in chemotherapy, as well as potential biomarkers for guiding effective treatments of breast cancer.
Upregulation of miR-744 is associated with poor prognosis in many types of cancer patients, but it is still unclear how miR-744 becomes elevated in these tumors.
C-Jun-induced miR-744 upregulation could significantly promote migration and invasion of nasopharyngeal carcinoma cells and non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells, hence ectopic c-Jun was sufficient to rescue the migratory and invasive ability of these cells when miR-744 was knockdown.
Additionally, a positive correlation between the expression levels of miR-744 and c-Jun was revealed in NSCLC samples with high (top 10%) level of miR-744 expression from the TCGA dataset.
Taken together, our results demonstrated for the first time the regulatory mechanism of miR-744 transcription by c-Jun, providing a potential mechanism underlying the upregulation of miR-744 in cancers.
Aberrant miR-744 expression has been indicated in many growth of tumor, the mechanism of miR-744 inhibits both the proliferation and metastatic ability for cervical cancer remains unclear.
The goal of this study was to identify miR-744 that could inhibit the growth, migration, invasion, proliferation and metastasis of gastric cancer through targeting Bcl-2 expression.
Our study indicated that miR-744 targeted on Bcl-2, which leads to the inactivation of apoptosis signaling and the cell proliferation of cervical cancer cells, ameliorating cervical cancer growth and progression.
In addition, both up-regulation of miR-744 and down-regulation of Bcl-2 could stimulate Caspase-3 expression, promoting apoptosis of cervical cancer cells.
Therefore, our research revealed the mechanistic links between miR-744 and Bcl-2 in the pathogenesis of cervical cancer through modulation of Caspase-3, leading to the inhibition of cervical cancer cell growth.
And targeting miR-744 could be served as a novel strategy for future cervical cancer therapy clinically.
Dysregulation of miR-744 is common in a number of cancers, indicating miR-774 might be closely correlated with the tumorigenesis process.
Functionally validated SNPs support identification of an SNP in SYNGR1 which may expose to the risk of rheumatoid arthritis and primary biliary cirrhosis, as well as an SNP in the last intron of COG6 exposing to the risk of psoriasis.
The aim of this study was to test the hypothesis about the protective role of high stefin A and stefin B concentrations in operable carcinoma of the head and neck.
Stefin A was recognized as a promising candidate marker for prognosis in patients with operable carcinoma of the head and neck.
Here we report that mouse embryos homozygous for a gene trap insertion in the fibulin-1 (Fbln1) gene are deficient in Fbln1 and exhibit cardiac ventricular wall thinning and ventricular septal defects with double outlet right ventricle or overriding aorta.
Three cases with deletion of the whole sodium channel gene cluster (SCN3A, SCN2A, SCN1A, SCN9A, and SCN7A) exhibited a complex epilepsy phenotype that was atypical for Dravet syndrome and suggestive of migrating partial seizures of infancy: early seizure onset (before 2 months of age), severe developmental delay from seizure onset, multifocal interictal spikes, polymorphous focal seizures, and acquired microcephaly.
A literature review of cases with chromosome 2q24.3 deletion revealed that, in most Dravet syndrome cases, it does not involve SCN2A and SCN3A, whereas a complex epilepsy phenotype that is shared with migrating partial seizures of infancy was associated with cases of deletion of the whole sodium channel gene cluster.
In contrast to known forms of retinal dystrophy, including those caused by mutations in the tubby-like protein TULP-1, loss of function of TUB in the proband and two affected family members was associated with early-onset obesity, consistent with an additional role for TUB in energy homeostasis.
TULP1 (the gene encoding tubby-like protein 1) is a candidate target for the disease mutation because it maps to the RP14 minimum genetic region and because a mutation in the highly homologous mouse tub gene leads to obesity, deafness and early progressive retinal degeneration.
The association of diabetes and cigarette smoke in DSPP group caused altered glycemia at term, reduced number of implantation and live fetuses, decreased litter and maternal weight, increased pre and postimplantation loss rates, reduced triglyceride and VLDL-c concentrations, increased levels of thiol groups and MDA.
According to the duration of diabetes or observation (1, 3, 6 months), each group was randomly subdivided into DM1, DM3, DM6; DMP1, DMP3, DMP6; and C1, C3, C6 groups.
The gene pathogenicity analysis revealed five key genes in psoriasis: PPARD, GATA3, TIMP3, WNT5A and PTTG1.
Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor Beta/Delta is a member of the nuclear hormone receptor superfamily suggested to contribute to psoriasis pathogenesis.
RAB24 has also been connected to several diseases including ataxia, cancer and tuberculosis.
We identified 12 biomarkers consistently associated with either clinical groups "upstream" towards culture-positive TB on the TB disease spectrum (CD14, FCGR1A, FPR1, MMP9, RAB24, SEC14L1, and TIMP2) or "downstream" towards a decreased likelihood of TB disease (BLR1, CD3E, CD8A, IL7R, and TGFBR2), suggesting a correlation with MTB-related pathology and high relevance to a future POC test for pediatric TB.
Taken together, our results suggest that a defect in RAB24, a gene associated with autophagy, is highly associated with and may contribute to canine hereditary ataxia in Old English Sheepdogs and Gordon Setters.
Since 2013, 3 female patients; 2 of them with Binder syndrome and 1 cleft lip/palate patient (average 18 years) with previous rhinoplasty (3-6 procedures) are subjected to secondary rhinoplasty using GPFF turning it over the osteochondral nasal framework.
In the remaining ten cases who could be followed up (31.2%), seven patients (21.8%) showed partial resolution with no further surgery required, two patients (6.2%) required additional excision of redundant mucosa as second procedure, one patient (3%) with associated cleft lip/palate and tracheomalacia had to undergo a tracheostomy.
This review focuses on the effects of oxidative stress and the role of a particular antioxidant system-the Keap1-Nrf2-ARE pathway-on ocular diseases, specifically age-related macular degeneration, cataracts, diabetic retinopathy, and glaucoma.
Tim9 and Tim10 are translocase components of the intermembrane space, related to deafness-dystonia peptide 1 (DDP1).
This is the first report of analysis of human serum proteome alterations in leptospirosis patients, which revealed several differentially expressed proteins, including Alfa-1-antitrypsin, vitronectin, ceruloplasmin, G-protein signaling regulator, apolipoprotein A-IV, which have not been reported in context of leptospirosis previously.
MED15 is part of the multiprotein Mediator complex which presents an integrative hub for transcriptional regulation and is known to be deregulated in several malignancies, such as prostate cancer and bladder cancer role, whereas the role of the Mediator complex in TGCT has not been investigated so far.
The mediator subunit MED15 is essential for transforming growth factor (TGF)-Beta signaling and involved in breast and prostate cancers.
In this study, we investigated whether the mediator subunit MED15 is implicated in castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC).
MED15 expression and copy number/rearrangement status were assessed by immunohistochemistry (IHC) and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), respectively on 718 prostate cancer (PCa) specimens and sequenced by Sanger on a subset.
CD56 (NCAM), a neural adhesion molecule, is normally expressed on natural killer cells and subsets of T cells and is commonly seen on hematolymphoid neoplasms such as plasma cell myeloma and acute myelogenous leukemia.
CD56 is a neural adhesion molecule and expressed in 70-80% cases of multiple myeloma (MM).
While DC-STAMP gene expression is upregulated in the gingival tissue with periodontitis, its pathophysiological roles in periodontitis remain unclear.
To evaluate the effects of DC-STAMP in periodontitis, anti-DC-STAMP-monoclonal antibody (mAb) was tested in a mouse model of ligature-induced periodontitis ( n = 6-7/group) where Pasteurella pneumotropica ( Pp)-reactive immune response activated T cells to produce receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa-B ligand (RANKL), which, in turn, promotes the periodontal bone loss via upregulation of osteoclastogenesis.
At dose level 3 (60 mg/m(2) docetaxel, 1,000 mg/m(2) capecitabine, 100 mg/m(2) oxaliplatin), 1 diarrhea (DLT) was found among 6 patients while at dose level 4 (60 mg/m(2) docetaxel, 800 mg/m(2) capecitabine, 130 mg/m(2) oxaliplatin), 2 DLTs (febrile neutropenia and diarrhea) were observed among 3 patients.
The potential roles of Ski2w and Dom3z on the clearance of degraded nuclear and cytoplasmic RNA raised their possibilities as susceptibility genes of systemic lupus erythematosus that is a disease with flawed processes in the removal of apoptotic materials.
Copolymers of 1,5-dioxepan-2-one (DXO) and L- or D,L-dilactide have been synthesized and characterized.
The molar ratio of the two monomers was around 20/80 of DXO and L- or D,L-lactide respectively.
The PG response to IL-1 alpha was suppressed to about 50% by simultaneous addition of CRF in endothelial cells (75.6 +/- 6.2 vs. 159.7 +/- 14.9 ng 6-keto-PGF1 alpha/mg protein) and fibroblasts (115.5 +/- 23 vs. 233.6 +/- 42 ng PGE2/mg protein).
ACEi protected from lymphangiogenesis and associated inflammation, preserved glomerular podoplanin protein expression, and reduced glomerulosclerosis, proteinuria, tubulointerstitial fibrosis, and blood capillary rarefaction at 32 wk.
Prevention of glomerular podoplanin loss and proteinuria could be attributed to the known intraglomerular pressure-lowering effects of ACEi.
The rising incidence of renal cell carcinoma, its more frequent early detection (stage T1a) and the increasing prevalence of chronic renal failure with higher morbidity and shorter life expectancy underscore the need for multimodal focal nephron-sparing therapy.
Decrease of podoplanin (PDPN) in podocytes and podocyte loss has been associated with the development of proteinuria.
Compared with radical nephrectomy, partial nephrectomy can prevent chronic kidney disease and still achieve an excellent oncological outcome for T1 renal tumours, in particular T1a tumours and tumours with a low R.E.N.A.L.
The recent identification of the novel uPAR ligand SRPX2 (Sushi repeat protein, X-linked 2) and the regulation of both the SRPX2 and PLAUR genes by transcription factor FOXP2 has shed novel and exciting insights into the role of uPAR-related molecular networks in rolandic epilepsy, in developmental verbal dyspraxia, in perisylvian polymicrogyria, and generally in disorders of the speech areas and circuits.
Mutations in SRPX2 (Sushi-Repeat Protein, X-linked 2) cause rolandic epilepsy with speech impairment (RESDX syndrome) or with altered development of the speech cortex (bilateral perisylvian polymicrogyria).
SPR analysis indicated that the p.Y72S mutation associated with rolandic epilepsy and perisylvian polymicrogyria, led to a 5.8-fold gain-of-affinity of SRPX2 with uPAR.
Morphine dependence can induce testis cell apoptosis, an increase in testis NOS positive cells, a decrease in CaM content and the activity of SOD and GSHPx in the testis.
Given the long postulated role of BDNF in epileptogenesis, TRPC3 channels may be a critical component in the underlying pathophysiology of seizure and epilepsy.
In this study, we investigated the precise role of TRPC3 channels in pilocarpine-induced status epilepticus (SE).
Following status epilepticus (SE), up-regulated transient receptor potential canonical channel-3 (TRPC3), a Ca2+-permeable cation channels in endothelial cells, is relevant to vasogenic edema formation in the rat piriform cortex.
Therefore, BDNF and TRPC3 should be involved in the occurrence and development of epilepsy.
Studies using mouse models as well as recent genetic and transcriptomic human findings point to an important role for TRPC3 signaling in cerebellar ataxia.
We measured the expression of two subtypes of TRPC channels, TRPC3 and TRPC6, in temporal lobe epileptic foci excised from patients with intractable epilepsy and in hippocampus of mice with pilocarpine-induced status epilepticus (SE), an animal model of TLE.
The aim of the present study is to explore the expression pattern of Pin1 in patients with refractory epilepsy and in a chronic pilocarpine-induced epileptic mouse model.
Our results are the first to indicate that the expression of Pin1 in epileptic brain tissue could play important roles in epilepsy.
There is evidence that with longer duration of migraine disease (DOD) amplitudes and habituation of CNV become progressively abnormal.
According to DOD, the total sample of migraine patients was divided into two groups (group a: DOD &lt;121 months, n = 17 subjects, group b: DOD &gt;120 months, n = 15 subjects).
Near-complete fragmentation of proteins up to 29 kDa is achieved with UVPD including the unambiguous localization of a single residue mutation and several protein modifications on Pin1 (Q13526), a protein implicated in the development of Alzheimer's disease and in cancer pathogenesis.
In the present study, we analysed the potential involvement of Pin1 in selective vulnerability of hippocampal neurons to neurofibrillary degeneration in Alzheimer's disease.
Since the main markers of granulovacuolar degeneration do not co-label Pin1-immunoreactive granules, we propose that these granules may represent a new lesion in Alzheimer's disease.
In this context, Pin1 becomes depleted from the nucleus in Alzheimer's disease (AD) neurons when it is redirected to the large amounts of hyperphosphorylated tau associated with the neurofibrillary tangles.
Women (N = 40) with incident bacterial vaginosis (Nugent 7-10) had significantly lower concentrations of lactobacilli and higher concentrations of Gardnerella vaginalis, Atopobium vaginae, and Prevotella bivia, at the incident visit and when concentrations of proinflammatory cytokines (IL-1Beta, IL-12p70) were increased and IP-10 and elafin were decreased.
Using a multiplex biochip array method (Randox, United Kingdom), the interleukins (ILs) IL-1Alfa, IL-1Beta, IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, IL-8, and IL-10; vascular endothelial growth factor; interferon Gamma, tumor necrosis factor Alfa ; monocyte chemotactic protein 1 (MCP-1); and epidermal growth factor were measured in citrated plasma samples drawn from the arms and legs of 24 patients with varicose veins and 24 controls.
Recently, germline fumarate hydratase (FH) mutations have been identified in a subset of PGL/PCC, and patients with hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cell carcinoma (HLRCC) may have an increased risk of developing PGL/PCC.
In addition, heterozygous mutations of the FH gene are responsible for hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cell cancer (HLRCC).
Fumarate hydratase-deficient renal cell carcinoma (FH-RCC) is a rare and aggressive tumor affecting mostly younger patients.
Progression Free Survival (PFS) of RSCC was significantly lower than that of LRCC and rectal cancer.
A CpG island methylator phenotype was observed in a distinct subgroup of type 2 papillary renal-cell carcinomas that was characterized by poor survival and mutation of the gene encoding fumarate hydratase.
Heterozygous germline mutations in the FH gene predispose to an aggressive autosomal dominant inherited early-onset kidney cancer syndrome: hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cell cancer (HLRCC).
While the theoretical risk of kidney cancer in parents of children with recessive fumarate hydratase deficiency is well recognized, to our knowledge this is the first report of a kidney tumour being detected in a parent by screening performed for this indication.
Hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cell carcinoma (HLRCC) syndrome is a recognized distinct phenotypic variant of multiple cutaneous and uterine leiomyomatosis.
The present case reports an extremely rare case of HLRCC syndrome combined with adrenocortical carcinoma.
The case suggests that HLRCC should be considered in any young patient with bulky uterine leiomyomas and renal cell cancer, and F-FDG PET/CT can help detect unexpected additional primary malignancy in a patient with known cancer.
We report a case of congenital hypertrichosis and FOXN1 duplication.
As far as we are aware, this is the first case of FOXN1 duplication associated with congenital hypertrichosis to be reported in the literature.
AIRE: autoimmune regulator; cAMP: cyclic adenosine 3',5'-cyclic monophosphate; CEA: carcinoembryonic antigen; CML: chronic myeloid leukemia; CREB: cyclicamp response element binding; CSCs: cancer stem cells; CTAs: cancer/testis antigens; CTL: cytotoxic T lymphocyte; DCs: dendritic cells; EMT: epithelial-mesenchymal transition; ERK: extracellular signal-regulated kinase; ESCC: esophageal squamous cell carcinoma; ETS: E26 transformation-specific; His: histidine; HLA: human leukocyte antigen; HNSCC: head and neck squamous cell carcinoma; IFN-Gamma: interferon-Gamma; IHC: Immunohistochemistry; IL-7: Interleukin7; MHC: major histocompatibility complex; MMP2: matrix metalloproteinase 2; mTECs: medullary thymus epithelial cells; MUC1: mucin 1; NSCLC: non-small cell lung cancer; PRAME: preferentially expressed antigen in melanoma; RDA: representational difference analysis; SEREX: serological analysis of cDNA expression; SSX: synovial sarcoma X chromosome; TAAs: tumor-associated antigens; TCR: T-cell receptor; TCGA: The Cancer Genome Atlas; TGF-Beta: transforming growth factor-Beta.
Consistent with our results, a clinical database showed that high expression of CREB correlates with favorable prognosis in B-cell lymphoma patients, which is totally different from the function of CREB in other cancers such as colorectal cancer, acute myeloid leukemia, and some endocrine cancers.
The transcription factor CREB (cAMP Response-Element Binding Protein) is overexpressed in the majority of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients, and this is associated with a worse prognosis.
cAMP response element binding protein (CREB) is frequently overexpressed in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and acts as a proto-oncogene; however, it is still debated whether such overactivation alone is able to induce leukemia as its pathogenetic downstream signaling is still unclear.
We generated a zebrafish model overexpressing CREB in the myeloid lineage, which showed an aberrant regulation of primitive hematopoiesis, and in 79% of adult CREB-zebrafish a block of myeloid differentiation, triggering to a monocytic leukemia akin the human counterpart.
The transcription factor CREB (cAMP Response Element Binding Protein) is an important determinant in the growth of Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML) cells.
We aimed to analyze the expression of JAK/STAT family members in a set of prevalent ISDs: psoriasis, lichen planus (LP), cutaneous lupus erythematosus (CLE), atopic dermatitis (AD), pyoderma gangrenosum (PG) and alopecia areata (AA) versus healthy controls for (p)JAK1, (p)JAK2, (p)JAK3, (p)TYK2, pSTAT1, pSTAT2 and pSTAT3.
The purpose of this case-control study was to investigate whether polymorphisms and gene-gene interactions of the two type I interferon (IFN) genes (IRF5 and TYK2) are the susceptible factors of systemic Lupus erythematosus (SLE) in the Han Chinese population.
Second, we show that the same three TYK2 variants protect against systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE, Pomnibus = 6 x 10(-18)), and provide suggestive evidence that two of the TYK2 variants (P1104A and A928V) may also protect against inflammatory bowel disease (IBD; P(omnibus) = 0.005).
In addition, Tyk2-mediated signaling promoted the production of autoimmune-associated components, which is implicated in the pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, multiple sclerosis.
However, OVX rats receiving 1,25(OH)2D3 alone or in combination with 1,24,25(OH)3D3 exhibited hypercalcemia, hyperphosphatemia, hypercalciuria, and impaired bone mineralization.
We performed a fixed effects meta-analysis of genome-wide association results of myopia and hyperopia from 9 studies of European-derived populations: AREDS, KORA, FES, OGP-Talana, MESA, RSI, RSII, RSIII and ERF.
Napsin A was negative in all thyroid carcinomas.
However, studies have shown that napsin A is also positive in approximately 5% of papillary thyroid carcinomas.
The prevalence of napsin A in more aggressive types of thyroid carcinoma is unknown.
Napsin A positivity in metastatic thyroid carcinoma, especially in conjunction with thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1), could be misdiagnosed as lung adenocarcinoma.
We investigated napsin A, TTF-1, and PAX8 expression in 26 anaplastic, 16 poorly differentiated, and 2 micropapillary pattern thyroid carcinomas.
Four of 26 (15%) anaplastic, 2/16 (13%) poorly differentiated, and 2/2 (100%) micropapillary pattern thyroid carcinomas were napsin A positive.
In summary, a minority of anaplastic and poorly differentiated thyroid carcinomas are napsin A positive.
PAX8 may be diagnostically useful to distinguish these napsin A-positive thyroid carcinomas from lung adenocarcinomas, which are PAX8 negative.
The morphology and immunohistochemistry (Napsin-A, Thyroglobulin) are very important in differential diagnosis of lung primary adenocarcinoma and metastatic papillary thyroid carcinoma.
The Napsin-A immunohistochemical evaluation was carried out using surgical specimens from 18 cases of adenocarcinoma, 19 cases of squamous cell carcinoma, 2 cases of large cell carcinoma, 1 case of bronchoalveolar carcinoma of lung, as well as 33 cases of renal cell carcinoma, 30 cases of thyroid neoplasm, 31 cases of colonic carcinoma, 31 cases of breast carcinoma, and 30 cases of endometrial adenocarcinoma.
Nap-A is superior to TTF-1 in distinguishing primary lung ACA from other carcinomas (except kidney), particularly primary lung small cell carcinoma, and primary thyroid carcinoma.
In the thyroid, only 2 cases of papillary thyroid carcinoma (5%), both with tall cell morphology, were positive for napsin A, whereas all other papillary and follicular carcinomas were negative.
Napsin A is a sensitive marker for pulmonary adenocarcinoma and is also expressed in a subset of renal cell carcinomas, particularly of the papillary type, as well as in rare cases of papillary thyroid carcinomas.
On the other hand, the association between vestibular schwannoma and enlarged vestibular aqueduct with variants in NF2 and SLC26A4, respectively, seems increasingly clear.
Cochlear implants and auditory brainstem implant have made hearing rehabilitation possible in NF2 patients who had bilateral sensorineural hearing loss.
The population comprised 23 NF2, 3 postmeningitis bilateral ossified cochleas, 3 solitary vestibular schwannomas on the only hearing ear, 1 inner ear malformation, and 1 bilateral cochlear destruction by otosclerosis.
Clinical evaluation showed hemotympanum on right with moderately severe conductive hearing loss, grade III LMN facial palsy and BPPV.
Studies on the immunopathogenesis of autoimmune arthritis in the rat adjuvant arthritis (AA) model of human rheumatoid arthritis (RA) as well as observations in patients with RA and juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) have unraveled immunoregulatory attributes of self-Hsp65-directed immunity.
We believe that these insights into Hsp65 immunity would not only advance our understanding of the disease process in RA/JIA, but also lead to the development of novel therapeutic approaches for autoimmune arthritis.
HSP60 deficiency is relevant to the existence of end-stage knee osteoarthritis.
HSP60 transgenic mice showed mild articular injury during knee osteoarthritis.
Control of cartilage-anabolic regulator HSP60 ameliorates knee osteoarthritis.
Prozumab was shown to bind to HSP60, the highly conserved mammalian homolog of the bacterial protein, and it was found to be effective in protecting and suppressing autoimmune arthritis in the models of adjuvant arthritis and collagen-induced arthritis in rats and mice, respectively, as well as in acute hapten-mediated colitis and chronic, spontaneous colitis models.
There was no significance difference in single CD4+, CD8+, CD22+, CD14+ and CD68+ staining between sarcoidosis and tuberculosis sections.
The novel bispecific ligand-directed toxin (BLT) DT2219 consists of a recombinant fusion between the catalytic and translocation enhancing domain of diphtheria toxin (DT) and bispecific single-chain variable fragments (scFV) of antibodies targeting human CD19 and CD22.
This study unravels an anti-metastatic role of AKT1 in the NSCLC cells with KRAS or EGFR mutations, and establishes an AKT1-MARCKS-LAMC2 feedback loop in this regulation.
In Africa, anemia in pregnancy contributes to non-attainment of the MDG goals 4 and 5.
With OxMdG, grade 3-4 toxicity was rare (neutropenia 2.8% cycles; vomiting or diarrhoea &lt;1% cycles), but despite this there were two infection-associated deaths.
For validation, we tested the candidates for association with healthy thinness in additional pedigree members while accounting for effects of obesity-associated genes: NPFFR2, NPY2R, FTO, and MC4R.
We conclude that haplotypes containing the rs17376826 SNP in intron 1 of NPY2R have strong associations with BMI, some NPFFR2 haplotypes are strongly protective against or increase risk of obesity, and both NPY2R and NPFFR2 play important roles in obesity predisposition independent of FTO and MC4R.
We report a haplotype in the GPR74 gene, ATAG, with allele frequency ~4% in Scandinavian cohorts, which was associated with protection against obesity in two samples selected for obese and lean phenotypes (odds ratio for obesity 0.48 and 0.62; nominal P=.0014 and .014; n=1,013 and 1,423, respectively).
These findings suggest that a common haplotype in the GPR74 gene protects against obesity, which, at least in part, is caused by a relief of inhibition of lipid mobilization from adipose tissue.
We separately reviewed interventions implemented as part of selected broader PSPs by way of example: hand hygiene, ventilator-associated pneumonia, rapid response systems and care transitions.
Since tachykinins appear to be involved in the pathogenesis of allergic asthma, we investigated a possible association between 28 single nucleotide polymorphisms of the tachykinin genes TAC1, TAC3 and TAC4, and asthma susceptibility.
Next to CD34 hypermethylation, miR-665 was predicted and experimentally confirmed to target CD34 mRNA in GIST-T1 cells.
Our results suggest that CD34 expression in GISTs may undergo a complex control by DNA methylation and miR-665.
Bioinformatics analysis identified rs1836724 to be a polymorphism in the seed region of four miRNA binding sites (hsa-miR335-5p, hsa-miR-28-5p, has-miR-708-5p and has-miR-665), which may participate in the development of breast cancer.
Samples of GSRCC were compared to that of intestinal gastric adenocarcinoma using Agilent microarray technique, and two differentially expressed miRNAs were identified, hsa-miR-665 and hsa-miR-95.
It was concluded that hsa-miR-665 and hsa-miR-95 were downregulated in GSRCC but upregulated in intestinal gastric adenocarcinoma, and the relatively differential expression of the miRNAs negatively controlling their target genes could be closely related to the high invasive metastasis and chemoresistance of GSRCC.
The purpose of the study was to assess urinary excretion of alpha-glutathione S-transferase (alpha-GST), pi-glutathione S-transferase (pi-GST), neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin (NGAL), kidney injury molecule-1 (KIM-1), and serum NGAL level in children with idiopathic nephrotic syndrome (INS).
Our results revealed that neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin and kidney injury molecule-1 levels were significantly increased in the urine of patients with minimal change nephrotic syndrome (MCNS) and the culture supernatant of HK-2 cells treated by urinary proteins extracted from MCNS patients.
To study serum levels of serum amyloid P component (SAP) and SAP-DNA complexes in a population-based cohort of patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).
To determine the presence of raised titres of anti-serum amyloid P component (SAP) antibodies in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and to evaluate their correlation with clinical disease by the SLEDAI and clinical manifestations.
The C-reactive protein (CRP) response is defective in patients with acute flares of disease, and mice with targeted deletions of the serum amyloid P component gene (Sap) develop a lupus-like illness.
Aortae from lupus mice showed reduced endothelium-dependent vasodilator responses to acetylcholine and increased nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate oxidase-driven vascular reactive oxygen species production, which were normalized by GW0742 treatment.
The expression and cell localization of caveolin-1 (Cav-1), thyroperoxidase (TPO), and dual oxidase (DUOX), involved in extracellular iodination, is modulated by Th1 cytokines in human normal thyroid cells and in Hashimoto's thyroiditis (HT).
Vascular reactive oxygen species content and mRNA levels of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate oxidase subunits NOX-1 and p47(phox) were increased in lupus mice and reduced by hydroxychloroquine or antioxidants.
These findings led us to investigate the effects of the main cytokines involved in Hashimoto thyroiditis (IFN-Gamma) and Graves' diseases (IL-4/IL-13) on the transcriptional regulation of DUOX and their corresponding DUOXA genes in thyroid cells.
The present data open new perspectives for a better understanding of the pathophysiology of thyroid autoimmune diseases considering DUOX2-mediated oxidative damages.
Real-time PCR of human FECD endothelium revealed a 10.4-fold upregulation of DRAM1 (P &lt; 0.0001) compared to autopsy controls.
The rs17070145-T variant of the WWC1 gene, coding for the KIBRA protein, has been associated with both increased episodic memory performance and lowered risk for late onset Alzheimer's disease, although the mechanism behind this protective effect has not been completely elucidated.
In conclusion, our results suggest that the effect of the WWC1 rs17070145 polymorphism on memory performance and Alzheimer's disease might be due to a differential regulation of the MAPK signaling, a key pathway involved in memory and learning processes.
Genetic variations of APOE and KIBRA have been associated with human memory and Alzheimer's disease.
Functional studies suggest that KIBRA is a potential candidate gene for memory and Alzheimer's disease (AD) risk.
The human KIBRA gene has been linked to human cognition through a lead intronic single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP; rs17070145) that is associated with episodic memory performance and the risk to develop Alzheimer's disease.
Genetic variation at the KIBRA rs17070145 polymorphism has been linked to episodic memory, executive function, and Alzheimer's disease (AD), which are related to the structural and functional integrity of the default-mode network (DMN) and executive control network (ECN).
This allele was associated with reduced Alzheimer's disease (AD) risk in 1 study, which also found overexpression of KIBRA in memory-related brain regions of AD.
We present prenatal diagnosis of mosaicism for a small supernumerary marker chromosome (sSMC) derived from chromosome 22 associated with cat eye syndrome (CES) using cultured amniocytes in a pregnancy with fetal microcephaly, intrauterine growth restriction, left renal hypoplasia, total anomalous pulmonary venous return with dominant right heart and right ear deformity.
The cat eye syndrome is a congenital malformation usually associated with anal atresia, ocular coloboma, downward slanting eyes, microphthalmia, hypertelorism, strabismus, preauricular tags or fistulas, congenital heart defect particularly septal defect, urinary tract abnormalities, skeletal anomalies and frequently mental and physical retardation.
However, the physiological relevance of these findings is unclear as no overt differences in the development of lung disease were observed in the Nlrp12(-/-) mice.
The return-to-forward peak current ratio, ipr/ipf, was found to increase towards unity with increasing DMF content of the medium, indicating the extended lifetime of RNO2(-.).
All target molecules, except adenosine and guanine, resulted in interaction with RNO2.-, as measured by the decrease in the ipr/ipf ratio in the following order of increasing reactivity: adenine, guanosine, thymine, uracil, uridine, and thymidine (at a metronidazole:target ratio of 1:1).
Moreover, the simultaneous inhibition of IL-4 and IL-13 has shown significant clinical activity in diseases that are often co-morbid with asthma - atopic dermatitis and chronic sinusitis with nasal polyps - supporting the hypothesis that targeting a central 'driver pathway' could benefit multiple allergic diseases.
In addition to the characteristic OPMD symptoms including ptosis and dysphagia, other symptoms such as limb girdle and axial weakness, and external ophthalmoplegia were frequently observed.
Oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy (OPMD) is a hereditary neuromuscular disease with autosomal dominant and rarely with autosomal recessive inheritance types.
Oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy (OPMD) is an inherited neuromuscular disease associated with a short trinucleotide repeat expansion in Exon 1 of the PABPN1 gene.
To describe the clinical and electrophysiologic features of an unselected population of patients diagnosed clinically or genetically with oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy (OPMD), and to discern any association with a peripheral neuropathy.
These findings argue against an association between OPMD and peripheral neuropathy.
OPMD may not be associated with a peripheral neuropathy, as has been previously suggested.
In this report a patient with both recessive OPMD and HNPP is described.
Although an elevated hemoglobin A1c (HbAc1) level is an independent predictor of worse survival in patients with both digestive cancer and diabetes mellitus, its relationship to short-term prognosis in these patients has not been addressed.
We identified novel driver mutations that developed during adenoma and cancer evolution, particularly in OR1B1 (GPCR signaling pathway) for adenoma evolution, and LAMA1 (PI3K-Akt signaling pathway) and ADCY3 (FGFR signaling pathway) for CRC evolution.
Recently, we provided human validation for a cooperating oncogenic role for cAMP in brain tumorigenesis when we found that SNPs in ADCY8 were correlated with glioma (brain tumor) risk in individuals with Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1).
However, the cAMP pathway is well-known to be sexually dimorphic, and SNPs in ADCY8 affected glioma risk in a sex-specific fashion, elevating the risk for females while protecting males.
Here, we report genetic polymorphisms in the human adenylate cyclase gene adenylate cyclase 8 (ADCY8) that correlate with glioma risk in NF1 in a sex-specific manner, elevating risk in females while reducing risk in males.
Overall, our results establish a sex-specific role for cAMP regulation in human gliomagenesis, specifically identifying ADCY8 as a modifier of glioma risk in NF1.
Some of the other CpG site annotated genes appear to be critical to the development of cancers and cardiovascular diseases (i.e., WNT16, C18orf8, ANGPTL2, SAPCD2, ADCY3, PRR16, ERBB2, DOK2, PLAC1).
The prominent CD-68 and lysozyme staining along with the histological features, the clinical presentation of erythematous nodules with diffuse erythematous plaques, and absence of bone marrow findings, led to the diagnosis of malignant histiocytosis confined to the skin.
The atypical histiocytes were positive for CD68 and lysozyme and negative for lymphoid markers, and the diagnosis of true malignant histiocytosis associated with mediastinal germ cell tumor was made.
Several histiocytic markers, including lysozyme, alpha1-antitrypsin and lectin RCA-1, revealed histiocytic origin of both inflammatory and neoplastic cells, however, those were not determinative for the discrimination between GME and malignant histiocytosis.
We used fMRI to evaluate verum and sham acupuncture stimulation at acupoint LI-4 in Carpal Tunnel Syndrome (CTS) patients and healthy controls (HC).
Our results indicate that the stimulatory effect of PTL on the differentiation of osteoblasts in inflammatory environments may involve the activation of the Wnt/Beta-catenin signaling pathway, and PTL may be a promising component for bone regeneration in periodontitis treatment.
Our findings indicated that baicalein enhanced the osteogenic differentiation of hPDLCs via the activation of the Wnt/Beta-catenin signaling pathway, which may represent a potential candidate for periodontitis therapy.
We used the Fluidigm (San Francisco, CA) C1 single-cell Autoprep System for single-cell complementary DNA (cDNA) generation and an enzyme-based tagmentation system (Nextera XT; Illumina, San Diego, CA) with a nanoliter liquid handler (mosquito HTS; TTP Labtech, Royston, UK) for library preparation, reducing the reaction volume down to 2 myL and using as little as 20 pg of input cDNA.
The authors sought to analyze the safety and efficacy of the thulium 2-mym laser applied through navigated, robot-assisted endoscopy in disconnection surgery for HHs.
The Insulin-like growth factor (IGF)/IGF-receptor pathway with its scaffolding proteins Insulin Receptor Substrate (IRS)1 and IRS2 are crucial regulators of metabolism and progression in metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC).
Recent studies explored the association between insulin receptor substrate-2 (IRS-2) gene rs1805097 polymorphism and colorectal cancer (CRC) with contradictory findings.
Taken together, our study provides the first evidence that miR-30a suppressed colon cancer cell growth through inhibition of IRS2.
Given the role of insulin resistance in colorectal cancer (CRC), we explored whether genetic variants in insulin (INS), insulin receptor (INSR), insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS1), insulin receptor substrate 2 (IRS2), insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1), and insulin-like growth factor binding protein 3 (IGFBP3) genes were associated with CRC risk.
The prevalence of IRS2 CNG in colorectal cancer tumors as measured by qPCR-CNV is approximately 35%.
To determine the risk of colon cancer by analysing the IRS-2 gene polymorphism in Turkish patients.
Our results demonstrated that IRS-2 G1057D polymorphism is not associated with colorectal cancer in the Turkish population.
Historeactivities to Congo red, PAS, Oil Red O, alcian blue, and Masson's trichrome were not detected, but immunoreactivities to CD29, CD34, and TG-2 were detected in the pingueculae with AF.
However, CD29, CD34, and TG-2 were not detected in the pingueculae without AF.
The AF of pingueculae may be related to CD29, CD34, and TG-2.
Disease-causing gene mutations were found in 10 patients from 7 families: DNAH5 in 4 families, and DNAI1, CCDC40, and RSPH4A in 1 family each.
Approximately 2.7% (n=10) and 16.4% (n=60) patients with scrub typhus had overt DIC, as defined by the International Society on Thrombosis and Hemostasis DIC score (DIC1) and the DIC-scoring template with a fibrinogen/C-reactive protein-ratio (DIC2), respectively.
A key enzyme for SA biosynthesis is isochorismate synthase (ICS), which converts chorismate into isochorismate, and for which there are two genes in Arabidopsis thaliana One (AtICS1) has been shown to be required for increased SA biosynthesis in response to pathogens and its expression can be stimulated throughout the leaf by virus infection and exogenous SA.
The gene encoding myopodin, an actin binding protein, is commonly deleted in invasive, but not in indolent, prostate cancers.
There are conflicting reports on the effects of myopodin expression on prostate cancer cell migration and invasion.
The recent recognition that myopodin is expressed as four different isoforms further complicates our understanding of how this potentially important invasive prostate cancer biomarker affects tumor cell migration and invasion.
We now show that myopodin affects the chemokinetic, rather than the chemotactic, properties of PC3 prostate cancer cells.
The correlation between loss of myopodin expression and invasive prostate cancer therefore reflects complex myopodin interactions with pathways that regulate the cellular migration response to diverse signals that may be present in a tumor microenvironment.
Myopodin has recently been characterized as a tumor suppressor gene whose encoded product inhibits prostate cancer growth and metastasis both in vitro and in animal models.
In this study, we conducted a large-scale analysis of myopodin expression in prostate cancer samples to examine the relationship between myopodin expression and prostate cancer grade and stage and the probability of clinical relapse.
The myopodin expression levels were examined in relation to prostate cancer grade and stage, preoperative prostate-specific antigen level, surgical margin involvement, tumor volume, and clinical relapse.
The mean myopodin expression score (range 0 to 3) was 2.1 and 0.88 for benign prostatic tissue and prostate cancer, respectively.
Minimal variation in myopodin expression was observed among the various grades, stages, tumor volumes, and preoperative prostate-specific antigen levels of prostate cancer.
Our results suggest that myopodin is an important predictor of prostate cancer metastasis, independent of Gleason score, preoperative prostate-specific antigen level, and tumor stage.
Myopodin was identified as a tumor suppressor gene that is frequently deleted in aggressive prostate cancer.
Myopodin was previously reported as a gene that was frequently deleted in prostate cancer.
To clarify the functional role of myopodin in prostate cancer, several assays were performed to evaluate the tumor suppression activity of myopodin.
To further evaluate the role of myopodin in suppressing the invasiveness of prostate cancer, an expression analysis of myopodin protein was performed in prostate tissues.
The results indicate that down-regulation of myopodin expression occurs mostly in invasive stages of prostate cancer, implying a potential invasion suppression role for myopodin in prostate cancer.
In addition, hemizygous deletion and down-regulation of myopodin expression occur in three aggressive prostate cancer cell lines.
Further study shows that frequent complete or partial deletions of the myopodin gene occurred among invasive prostate cancer cases (25 of 31 cases, or 80%).
Statistical analysis indicates that deletion of myopodin is highly correlated with the invasiveness of prostate cancers, and thus may hold promise as an important prognostic marker for prostate cancers.
We examined immunostaining of TGFB1 and BMPs (BMP2/BMP4/BMP6/BMP7/BMP9) in a total of 19 post-mortem human brain samples as follows: 7 SVD patients (4 males, 76-90 years old); 6 Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients (2 males, 67-93 years old) and 6 age-matched disease controls (3 males, 68-78 years old).
Liver sections were labeled to detect antigens associated with liver epithelial cells [E-cadherin (E-cad)], EMT [fibroblast-specific protein-1 (FSP-1), vimentin], myofibroblasts [Alfa-smooth muscle actin (Alfa-SMA)], and intracellular signal-transduction mediated by forming liver fibrosis undergo EMT, resulting in the formation of invasive fibroblasts; this process may be driven or impeded by a response to local TGF-Beta1 or BMP-7.
The RPPA investigation and its validation, identified 3 series of proteins: 1) molecules whose expression levels reached statistically significant differences in CLL vs. healthy controls (HSP70, Smac/DIABLO, cleaved PARP, and cleaved caspase-6); 2) proteins with a positive trend of difference in CLL vs. healthy controls (HS1, Gamma-tubulin, PKC Alfa/Beta-II Thr-638/641, p38 MAPK Thr-180/Tyr-182, NF-KB Ser-536, Bcl2 Ser-70 and Src Tyr-527); and 3) molecules differentially expressed in patients with IGHV mutations vs. those without mutations (ZAP70, PKC-ZetaLambda, Thr-410/403, and CD45).
A study was conducted to find whether a deficiency in prostacyclin (prostaglandin I2; PGI2) is implicated in the pathogenesis of thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura.
IgM levels were measured with the Luminex assay and compared to levels measured using the microarray for 126 healthy individuals and 77 prostate cancer patients.
Elevated blood glucose and increased activities of secreted phospholipase A2 (sPLA2) are strongly linked to coronary heart disease.
Secretory phospholipases (sPLA2) are a group of pro-inflammatory molecules associated with diseases such as atherosclerosis, which increase the risk of reperfusion injury.
A critical association between type II secretory phospholipase A2 (sPLA2-IIa) and established atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease has been demonstrated.
However, the contribution of sPLA2-IIa to early atherosclerosis remains unknown.
This study investigated the association between early-stage atherosclerosis and sPLA2-IIa in metabolic syndrome (MetS) patients.
Moreover, multivariate analysis showed that high sPLA2-IIa protein and activity levels were independent risk factors of early atherosclerosis in MetS patients.
This study demonstrates an independent association between early-stage atherosclerosis and increased levels of sPLA2-IIa, implying that increased sPLA2-IIa may predict early-stage atherosclerosis in MetS patients.
This study is the first to report on the molecular interaction between maslinic acid and inflammatory target hGIIA-sPLA2 as well as its effect towards hGIIA-sPLA2-induced THP-1 monocyte adhesive and migratory capabilities, an important immune-inflammation process in atherosclerosis.
Group IIA secretory phospholipase A2 (sPLA2-IIA) has an important role in atherosclerosis.
In this study, we explored whether sPLA2-IIA overexpression could promote atherosclerosis in normal environment alone or with other inflammatory factors.
Observational studies report that secretory phospholipase A2 (sPLA2) activity is a marker for coronary heart disease (CHD) risk, and activity measures are thought to represent the composite activity of sPLA2-IIA, -V, and -X.
The aim of this study was to use genetic variants of PLA2G10, encoding sPLA2-X, to investigate the contribution of sPLA2-X to the measure of sPLA2 activity and coronary heart disease (CHD) risk traits and outcome.
Given that high-density lipoprotein (HDL) is the major substrate for sPLA2 in plasma, we investigated the effects of sPLA2-mediated modification of HDL (sPLA2-HDL) on neutrophil function, an essential arm of the innate immune response and atherosclerosis.
For immunohistochemistry, 95 thyroid tumors (follicular adenoma, papillary TC, follicular TC, PDTC, and anaplastic TC [ATC]) were investigated for GLUT1 expression and proliferation (Ki-67 index).
Glucose transporter-1 (GLUT-1) expression was immunohistochemically analysed in a total of 268 cases of thyroid gland disease, including 129 cases of papillary carcinoma (PC), 60 cases of follicular carcinoma (FC), 57 cases of follicular adenoma, and 22 cases of adenomatous goitre.
GLUT-1 expression was observed in 5% (3/60) of FC cases, but all follicular adenomas and adenomatous goitres were negative for GLUT-1 (PC vs. FC, p&lt;0.0001).
Semi-quantitative analysis of glut-1 mRNA by RT-PCR showed a tendency toward higher expression in PCs compared to FCs, follicular adenomas and adenomatous goitres, and the mRNA expression in PCs with a membrane-like pattern was higher than those showing cytoplasm-predominance.
Tropomyosin-related kinase B (TrkB), Her2, and downstream targets were analyzed in primary breast cancer, breast-to-brain metastasis (BBM) tissues, and tumor-derived cell lines using quantitative real-time PCR, western blot, and immunohistochemical assessment.
TrkB knockdown in breast cancer cells led to decreased frequency and growth of brain metastasis in animal models, suggesting that circulating breast cancer cells entering the brain may take advantage of paracrine BDNF-TrkB signaling for colonization.
In addition, we investigated a possible interaction between TrkB and Her2 receptors on brain metastatic breast cancer cells, and found that BDNF phosphorylated both its cognate TrkB receptor and the Her2 receptor in brain metastatic breast cancer cells.
Collectively, our findings suggest that heterodimerization of Her2 and TrkB receptors gives breast cancer cells a survival advantage in the brain and that dual inhibition of these receptors may hold therapeutic potential.
Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) is a potent neurotrophic factor that has been shown to stimulate breast cancer cell growth and metastasis via tyrosine kinase receptors TrkA, TrkB, and the p75NTR death receptor.
The aim of the current review was to provide an overview of the role of BDNF/TrkB pathways in the pathogenesis of breast cancer and its value as a potential therapeutic target.
The purpose of the present study was to examine the relationships between genetic polymorphisms within Neurotrophic tyrosine kinase receptor 1 (NTRK1), Neurotrophic tyrosine kinase receptor 2 (NTRK2), and catechol-O-methyltransferase ( COMT) and patient symptom burden of QOL, pain, fatigue, anxiety, depression, and sleep disturbance before, during, and after treatment for breast cancer in a subset of participants ( N = 51) in a randomized clinical trial of a novel symptom-management modality for women with breast cancer undergoing chemotherapy.
These findings, while exploratory, indicate that the genotypes of NTRK2 and COMT may contribute to relative risk for symptom burden during and shortly after the period of chemotherapy in women with early stage breast cancer.
9/34 down-regulated genes (FIGF, RELN, PROM1, SFRP1, MMP7, NTRK2, LAMB3, SPRY2, KIT) had changes larger than CDH1, a hallmark of ILC.
While screening for the key regulators of cancer metastasis, we observed that neurotrophin receptor TrkB is frequently overexpressed in breast cancer patients and breast cancer cell lines.
Additionally, we demonstrate that TrkB expression and clinical breast tumor pathological phenotypes show significant correlation.
Moreover, TrkB expression was significantly upregulated in basal-like, claudin-low, and metaplastic breast cancers from a published microarray database and in patients with triple-negative breast cancer, which is associated with a higher risk of invasive recurrence.
Interestingly, we identified a new TrkB-regulated functional network that is important for the tumorigenicity and metastasis of breast cancer.
These observations suggest that TrkB plays a key role in tumorigenicity and metastasis of breast cancer cells through suppression of Runx3 or Keap1 and that it is a promising target for future intervention strategies for preventing tumor metastasis and cancer chemoprevention.
Analysis of a pediatric medulloblastoma showed that clusters of NRBP2 positive tumor cells co-expressed neurofilament, but not GFAP.
Recently, we reported a high prevalence of immunoglobulin G and/or immunoglobulin M anticardiolipin antibodies (aCL) in patients with autoimmune liver diseases, namely, autoimmune hepatitis (AIH), primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC), and primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC), which were independent of the respective isotypes of antibodies against beta2-glycoprotein I (anti-b2GPI).
In addition to thrombocytopenia (50 Gpt/l) and leukocytopenia (1,51 10 (9)/l) we diagnosed a hyperchromic and macrocytic anemia (Hb 3,6 mmol/l [5,8 g/dl], Hk 0,17, MCH 2.52 fmol, 116,8 fl).
We also examined secretion of a series of other chemokines and cytokines: MCO-1, IL-6, IL-1Beta, IL-8, GM-CFS, and others.
In addition, IMD1-53 decreased the production of inflammatory factors such as tumor necrosis factor-Alfa, monocyte chemotactic protein-1, interleukin-6 (IL-6), and IL-1Beta in the mouse myocardium and rat CFs treated with Hcy.
GC sensitivity differed significantly between CFS patients and healthy controls, with CFS patients showing a greater sensitivity towards GCs (TNF-Alfa: F 1/39 = 7.32, P = 0.01; IL-6: F 1/39 = 9.73, P = 0.004).
Treatment with IL-6 significantly promoted the proliferation and collagen production of cultured cardiac fibroblasts (CFs).
High glucose treatment increased collagen production, which were mitigated in CFs from IL-6 KO mice.
Moreover, IL-6 knockout alleviated the up-regulation of TGFBeta1 in diabetic hearts of mice and cultured CFs treated with high glucose or IL-6.
Overexpression of miR-29 blocked the pro-fibrotic effects of IL-6 on cultured CFs.
By contrast, incubation of the co-culture with CFS increased IL-1Beta, IL-6, TGF-Beta2 and IP-10 production only when Salmonella was present.
Quantitative RT-PCR showed that HS6ST2, COL1A1, F2RL1, LEPREL1, PDZK1, and PDZK1IP1 are overexpressed in thyroid carcinoma samples compared with normal thyroids.
Among these, antisense noncoding RNA in the INK4 locus (ANRIL), hypoxia inducible factor 1alpha antisense RNA-2 (HIF1A-AS2), and urothelial carcinoma-associated 1 (UCA1) were markedly upregulated in plasma of patients with TNBC compared with patients with NTNBC (P &lt; 0.01).
Among regulatory mechanisms for HIF expression is a natural occurring antisense named aHIF, which has been shown to be overexpressed in breast cancer and influence the level of the HIF-1Alfa transcript.
In the present study, we analyzed the expression of HIF-1Alfa and aHIF in breast cancer tissues versus adjacent noncancer tissues (ANCTs) in relation with the clinical and biological behavior of the tumors.
aHIF has been shown to be expressed in 67.4% of invasive ductal carcinoma samples, while none of ANCTs showed its expression.
Collectively, these data suggest that aHIF overexpression can be used as a potential biomarker in breast cancer.
LncRNA hypoxia inducible factor 1alpha antisense RNA-2 (HIF1A-AS2) is upregulated in gastric carcinomas and knockdown of HIF1A-AS2 expression by siRNA could inhibit cell proliferation in vitro and tumorigenesis in vivo.
Inspired by these observations, we hypothesized that HIF1A-AS2 possibly plays the analogous roles in bladder cancer.
In our study, we first reported that HIF1A-AS2 was up-regulated in bladder cancer tissues and cells, and HIF1A-AS2 expression level in bladder cancer tissues is positively associated with advanced clinical pathologic grade and TNM phase.
Cell proliferation inhibition, cell migration suppression and apoptosis induction were observed by silencing HIF1A-AS2 in bladder cancer T24 and 5637 cells.
Besides, we utilized the emerging technology of medical synthetic biology to design tetracycline-inducible small hairpin RNA (shRNA) vector which specifically silenced HIF1A-AS2 in a dosage-dependent manner to inhibit the progression of human bladder cancer.
In conclusion, our data suggested that HIF1A-AS2 plays oncogenic roles and can be used as a therapeutic target for treating human bladder cancer.
Synthetic "tetracycline-on" switch system that quantitatively controlled the expression of HIF1A-AS2 in bladder cancer can inhibit the progression of bladder cancer cells in a dosage-dependent manner.
Our findings provide new insights into the role of the lncRNA HIF1A-AS2 in the bladder cancer.
LncRNA hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha antisense RNA-2 (HIF1A-AS2) is overexpressed in nonpapillary clear-cell renal carcinomas and involved in cancer progression.
This study was to evaluate the expression of HIF1A-AS2 in gastric cancer (GC) and further explore its biological function in GC cells.
With a semiquantitative multiplex reverse transcriptase-PCR (RT-PCR) assay, we assessed transcript concentrations of HIF-1alpha, sHIF-1alpha and aHIF in 110 patients with invasive breast carcinoma.
aHIF transcript expression was associated with poor disease-free survival in univariate (P = 0.0038) and multivariate (P = 0.0016) analyses in this series of high-risk primary breast carcinomas.
In our series of breast cancer patients, aHIF, and not HIF-1alpha transcript, is a marker of poor prognosis.
Recently, mutations of the CSMD3 gene were identified in schizophrenia and autism patients.
To investigate the expression of MMP-2, TIMP-1, E-cadherin and beta-catenin in endometrial serous carcinoma (ESC), low-grade endometrial endometrioid carcinoma (EEC), and proliferative endometrium.
This study attempts to assess the prognostic importance of stromal MMP-2 in patients with ovarian endometrioid and serous adenocarcinoma.
MMP-2, MMP-2 activator, MT1-MMP, and its inhibitor (TIMP-2) were immunostained in 84 primary epithelial ovarian carcinomas (EOCs) (35 endometrioid adenocarcinomas [ECs] and 49 serous adenocarcinomas [SCs]).
Concentrations of MMP-9 and MMP-2 were statistically higher in serous adenocarcinomas than in serous adenomas (p &lt; 0.01, p &lt; 0.05, respectively), while the concentrations of TIMP-1 and TIMP-2 showed no significant difference between adenocarcinomas and adenomas.
These observations indicate that matriolytic enzymes such as MMP-2, MMP-7 and MMP-9 are secreted into cyst fluid from serous adenocarcinoma tissues.
Genome wide association studies suggest that polymorphisms within human elmo1 act as a potential contributing factor for the development of diabetic nephropathy.
Thus, this study aimed to identify the role played by ELMO1 in renal development in zebrafish, under hyperglycaemic conditions, and in diabetic nephropathy patients.
This is the first study to report a significant association of the SLC12A3 rs11643718 and ELMO1 rs741301 (Single nucleotide Polymorphism) SNPs with diabetic nephropathy in south Indians.
Human genome-wide association studies have demonstrated that polymorphisms in the engulfment and cell motility protein 1 gene (ELMO1) are strongly associated with susceptibility to diabetic nephropathy.
Remarkably, the reduced Elmo1 expression in the 30% hypomorphs almost abolishes the pathological features of diabetic nephropathy, although it does not affect the hyperglycemia caused by the Akita mutation.
Thus, ELMO1 plays an important role in the development of type 1 diabetic nephropathy, and its inhibition could be a promising option for slowing or preventing progression of the condition to end-stage renal disease.
However, until now only a handful number of genetic variants were reported to be associated with either nephropathy (ACE, ELMO1, FRMD3, and AKR1B1) or retinopathy (VEGF, AKR1B1, and EPO), and only a few studies were carried out for genetic susceptibility to cardiovascular diseases (ADIPOQ, GLUL) in patients with diabetes.
Four genes (HFE, ELMO1, SLC12A3, and CCR5) were selected on the basis of reported association with type 2 diabetes and nephropathy.
In all, 417 diabetic subjects (215 without kidney disease [DM] and 202 with DN) and 197 healthy controls (HC) were evaluated for variations in HFE (845 G&gt;A and 187G&gt;C), SLC12A3 (g.34372G&gt;A), CCR5 (59029A&gt;G), and ELMO1 (+9170 G&gt;A).
Strong biological candidates for CKD that showed statistically significant differential methylation include CUX1, ELMO1, FKBP5, INHBA-AS1, PTPRN2, and PRKAG2 genes; several genes are differentially methylated in kidney tissue and RNA-seq supports a functional role for differential methylation in ELMO1 and PRKAG2 genes.
AKR1B1, APOE, ENPP1, ELMO1 and IGFBP1 are the genes that have been identified as an important target for type II diabetic nephropathy through experimental studies.
A total of 1635 patients without symptoms and signs relevant to diabetic polyneuropathy (1275 with T2DM and 360 with LADA) were included and were further categorized into 3 groups according to diabetes duration: &lt;5years, 5-14 years and &gt;=15years.
The expressions of TRIP11, HIF-1Beta, THRA, THRB, FURIN, VEGFA, and GLUT1 were disturbed in renal cancer.
Real-time RT-PCR was used to demonstrate the expression of prohormone convertase (PC)1/3, PC2 and furin in prostate cancer cell lines.
The RWPE-1 and RWPE-2 normal prostate-derived cell lines and the LNCaP, DU145, and PC3 prostate cancer cell lines express GOAT and at least one other enzyme that is necessary to produce mature, acylated ghrelin from proghrelin (PC1/3, PC2 or furin).
Finally, to evaluate the importance of PSA's proteolytic activity, the PSA-null Du145 human prostate cancer cell line was engineered to express either enzymatically inactive pro-PSA (WT) or a furin-activated variant (FR) with high enzymatic activity.
Functionally parallel to v-akt murine thymoma viral oncogene homolog (AKT)/protein kinase B, SGK3 serves as a hallmark mediating glycogen synthase kinase-Beta (GSK3-Beta), B-cell lymphoma (Bcl)-2-associated death promoter, forkead family of transcription factors, Bcl-extra large, Bcl-2, mammalian target of rapamycin, C-X-C chemokine receptor type 4 (CXCR4) and numerous other molecules in cell proliferation, growth, survival, migration and even tumor angiogenesis.
Tissue blocks containing pulmonary small cell carcinoma, pulmonary carcinoid, large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma, pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor, gastrointestinal carcinoid, and Merkel cell carcinoma were evaluated for CD200 expression by immunohistochemistry.
CD200 was expressed in 87% of the neuroendocrine neoplasms studied, including 60 of 72 (83%) pulmonary small cell carcinomas, 15 of 22 (68%) pulmonary carcinoids, three of four (75%) pulmonary large cell neuroendocrine carcinomas, 125 of 146 (86%) Merkel cell carcinomas, 79 of 83 (95%) gastrointestinal luminal carcinoids, and 56 of 60 (93%) pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors.
In hepatocytes of alcoholic fatty liver disease (AFLD), ethanol increases the expression of lipin-1 through the AMPK-SREBP-1 signaling and the Lpin1Beta/Alfa ratio by SIRT1-SFRS10- Lpin1Beta/Alfa axis.
The lack of WRN results in Werner syndrome, a rare autosomal recessive genetic disorder, which causes premature aging accompanied by many complications such as rare forms of cancer and type 2 diabetes.
As an analogy of the mechanism in natural aging, we described a hypothetical mechanism of premature aging in WS: telomere dysfunction induced by WRN mutation causes multiple premature aging phenotypes of WS, including shortened cellular lifespan and inflammation induced by ROS, such as diabetes mellitus.
Mutations in NADH dehydrogenase ubiquinone flavoprotein 2 (NDUFV2) are responsible for schizophrenia, bipolar disorder and Parkinson's disease.
The aim of this study is to examine the mitochondrial targeting of NDUFV2 and dissect the pathogenetic mechanism of one human deletion mutation present in patients with early-onset hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and encephalopathy.
The deletion mutant mimicking the human early-onset hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and encephalopathy lacked 19-40 residues in NDUFV2 and exhibited a significant reduction in its mitochondrial targeting ability.
The results of human disease cell model established that the impairment of mitochondrial localization of NDUFV2 as a mechanistic basis for early-onset hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and encephalopathy.
To determine the serum sCD93 level and its association with clinical parameters in patients with systemic sclerosis (SSc).
Serum sCD93 levels were examined by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay in 59 patients with SSc, 24 patients with systemic lupus erythematosus and 47 healthy individuals.
Patients with diffuse cutaneous SSc showed greater levels of sCD93 than those with limited cutaneous SSc (P&lt;0*01) or systemic lupus erythematosus (P&lt;0*01).
Interestingly, the NZB/W F1 strain, which serves as a murine model of Lupus, also expresses an identical CD93 sequence polymorphism.
Aim of the study was to compare the expression of monocytes C1qRp (CD93) in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) with that of healthy controls and to determine the influence of glucocorticoids and LPS on C1qRp expression.
In this study, we show that both heterozygous and homozygous mice deficient for lipocalin-type prostaglandin D(2)  (PGD(2) ) synthase (Ptgds) presented unilateral cryptorchidism affecting the second phase of testicular descent in 16% and 24% of cases, respectively.
These observations led us to investigate the role of the PGD(2)  signaling pathway in human testicular migration through PTGDS sequencing of DNA from 29 children with cryptorchidism.
Nevertheless, our results identify the PTGDS enzyme as a novel component in the cryptorchidism puzzle.
Using stringent filtering criteria, Apolipoprotein A-IV (APOA-IV), Albumin and Antithrombin 3 (ANT3) were detected at significantly higher levels in PCG AH compared to control, whereas Transthyretin (TTR), Prostaglandin-H2 D-isomerase (PTGDS), Opticin (OPT) and Interphotoreceptor Retinoid Binding Protein (IRBP) were detected at significantly lower levels.
We compared the diagnostic performance of cystatin C and beta-trace protein with serum creatinine and the Schwartz formula for the estimation of glomerular filtration rate in children with spina bifida.
Correlation coefficients for cystatin C were 0.45 and 0.84 in the spina bifida and control groups, respectively, while correlation coefficients for beta-trace protein were 0.31 and 0.75, respectively.
Mice lacking both LDL receptor (LDLR) and Arhgef1 were protected from high-fat diet-induced atherosclerosis.
Moreover, reconstitution of Ldlr-/- mice with Arhgef1-deficient BM prevented high-fat diet-induced atherosclerosis, while reconstitution of Ldlr-/- Arhgef1-/- with WT BM exacerbated atherosclerotic lesion formation, supporting Arhgef1 activation in leukocytes as causal in the development of atherosclerosis.
Thus, our data highlight the importance of Arhgef1 in cardiovascular disease and suggest targeting Arhgef1 as a potential therapeutic strategy against atherosclerosis.
In summary, LSC-1 cells exhibit activated HSC phenotype characteristics, and therefore are useful tool to study the pathogenesis of liver cirrhosis and portal hypertension.
The mRNA and protein levels of JAK2/ARHGEF1 signalling components were analysed in 49 human liver samples and correlated with clinical parameters of portal hypertension in these patients.
Hepatic transcription of JAK2/ARHGEF1 pathway components was upregulated in liver cirrhosis dependent on aetiology, severity and complications of human liver cirrhosis (Model for End-stage Liver disease (MELD) score, Child score as well as ascites, high-risk varices, spontaneous bacterial peritonitis).
Hepatic JAK2/ARHGEF1/ROCK expression is associated with portal hypertension and decompensation in human cirrhosis.
Arhgef1 was identified as a RhoA guanine exchange factor involved in angiotensin II (Ang II)-mediated regulation of vascular tone and hypertension in mice.
Although no difference of in vitro proliferation of NSCs was observed in the presence of epidermal growth factor, maturation of oligodendrocytes (defined by process number and length) was enhanced in hyperthyroidism, suggesting a more mature state than in control animals.
In conclusion, we report that EGF treatment for 4 weeks in Goettingen minipigs reduces circulating IGF-I and IGFBP-3, increases circulating IGFBP-1, IGFBP-2 and IGFBP-4, and induces a slight hyperthyroidism as judged from increased circulating levels of T3.
We examined long-term effects of neonatal hyperthyroidism on salivary secretions of nerve growth factor and epidermal growth factor in male and female mice at the age of 31 days.
EIF5A2 is highly expressed in testis and colorectal adenocarcinoma and at moderate levels in the brain, in contrast to the ubiquitously expressed EIF5A1 gene.
In the remaining cases, next generation sequencing was carried out revealing variants in a number of other known complex spastic paraplegia genes, including five in SPG7 (5/97), four in FA2H (also known as SPG35) (4/97) and two in ZFYVE26/SPG15 Variants were identified in genes usually associated with pure spastic paraplegia and also in the Parkinson's disease-associated gene ATP13A2, neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis gene TPP1 and the hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy DNMT1 gene, highlighting the genetic heterogeneity of spastic paraplegia.
DACT1 has been shown to participate in the development of many types of tumors; however, its role and precise molecular mechanisms in leukemia are unclear.
In this study, we investigated the effect of DACT1 on KG-1Alfa leukemia cells to further understand the mechanisms of DACT1-mediated tumor suppression.
These findings revealed an inhibitory role for DACT1 in leukemogenesis and provided evidence that DACT1 is an attractive target for the development of novel anti-leukemia therapies.
Quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) was performed to detect messenger RNA (mRNA) expression levels of Wnt antagonists (Wnt5a, HDPR1, DKK1 and DKK3) in patients with AL and in normal controls; pyrophosphate sequencing was performed to detect the methylation status of the Wnt5a promoter; and western blotting was performed to detect the overall expression levels of Wnt5a protein and histone H4K20me1 in patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and in normal controls.
We subsequently validated the upregulated gene panel in the Cancer Genome Atlas CRC datasets (379 patients), which identified a five-gene signature (S100A2, VIP, HOXC6, DACT1, KIF26B) associated with poor overall survival (OS, log-rank test P-value: 1.19 x 10-4) and poor disease-free survival (DFS, log-rank test P-value: 0.002).
DACT1Alfa was silenced in all gastric cancer cell lines (8/8), but expressed in normal gastric tissue.
Ectopic expression of DACT1Alfa in silenced gastric cancer cell lines (AGS, BGC823 and MGC803) by stable transfection significantly suppressed cancer cell spreading (P &lt; 0.05), migration (P &lt; 0.01) and invasion (P &lt; 0.01).
DACT1Alfa promoter methylation was detected in 205 gastric cancers and 20 normal controls by direct bisulfite genomic sequencing.
DACT1Alfa methylation was detected in 29.3% (60/205) of gastric cancer patients, but not in normal tissues.
DACT1Alfa methylation was associated with poor survival of gastric cancer patients.
In conclusion, DACT1Alfa plays a pivotal role as a potential tumor suppressor in migration and invasion of gastric cancer.
DACT1Alfa methylation may serve as a biomarker for the prognosis of gastric cancer.
Furthermore, MIZ1 can promote the proliferation of breast cancer MDA-MB-231 and BT-549 cells through Wnt signalling and reverse the anti-proliferative effect of Dpr1 on colorectal cancer Caco-2.
The frequency of IFNA1 -1823 (rs1332190) GG genotype was significantly higher in control subjects than CCHF patients (20% vs. 8%; P = 0.01).
For IFNA17 Ile184Arg (rs9298814) polymorphism, CCHF patients having TG genotype had a higher frequency than the control subjects (38% vs. 32.4%; P = 0.039).
The results show that IFNA1 rs1332190 and IFNA17 rs9298814 SNPs may play an important role in CCHF susceptibility.
Determining the existence of other connections for IFNA SNPs and CCHF severity and fatality requires further investigations.
We also sequenced a 1.8-kb region encoding the RNA polymerase II second largest subunit (RPB2) from 126 additional pathogenic isolates to better understand how the keratitis outbreak isolates fit within the full phylogenetic spectrum of clinically important fusaria.
Ruxolitinib was found to fully inhibit IL-6-mediated repression of CYP (CYP1A2, CYP2B6 and CYP3A4) and transporter (NTCP, OATP1B1 and OCT1) mRNA levels in primary human hepatocytes and differentiated hepatoma HepaRG cells.
To investigate the impact of polymorphisms in the FPGS, GGH and SLCO1B1 genes on high dose methotrexate (HD-MTX) related toxicity in Chinese patients with non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL).
After adjusting for disease stage, dosage, infusion time and therapy method, SLCO1B1 rs4149056 genotype remained significantly associated with hepatotoxicity (p = 0.028).
Solute carrier organic anion transporter family member 1B1 (SLCO1B1), cytochrome P450 2E1 (CYP2E1), and UDP glucuronosyltransferase 1A1 (UGT1A1) were selected as candidate genes to explore their association with susceptibility to anti-tuberculosis drug-induced hepatotoxicity (ATDH).
Moreover, treatment outcomes in tuberculosis patients were further affected by genetic variants of SLCO1B1.
Membrane-spanning 4-domains, subfamily A, member 6A (MS4A6A) has been identified as susceptibility loci of Alzheimer's disease (AD) by several recent genome-wide association studies (GWAS), whereas little is known about the potential roles of these variants in the brain structure and function of AD.
To investigate the role of phosphorylated JNK in Dectin-1-induced IL-1Beta production and the role of Dectin-1 in apoptosis in mouse Aspergillus fumigatus (A. fumigatus) keratitis.
Furthermore, Dectin-1 deficiency resulted in increased ratio of Bax/Bcl-2, release of cyt-c, activation of caspase-9 and caspase-3 in mouse A. fumigatus keratitis.
Being an important inflammatory PRR to mediate host inflammatory response, Dectin-1 induced IL-1Beta production is JNK dependent in mouse A. fumigatus keratitis, and suppressed apoptosis mediated anti-inflammatory response.
Using single receptor-deficient mice we identified Dectin-2, but not Mincle or Dectin-1, as a predominant mediator of fungal-promoted uveitis.
neutrophils were the main cell lineage of IL-1Beta to take part in the innate anti-fungi immunity in the cornea; IL-1Beta generation induced by fungal infection might not be through the pre-excitation in the classical signal pathway; TLR4/TRIF pathway was not involved in pro-IL-1Beta generation; while Dectin-1/syk pathway was involved in IL-1Beta generation in the fungal keratitis; Caspase-l participated in the modification of IL-1Beta to change from the precursor into the mature body; but NLRP3 inflammasome and ASC inflammasome were not involved in IL-1Beta generation; Caspase-11 was involved in IL-1Beta generation through regulating the modified process of Caspase-l to turning from precursor into mature body.
To explore the possibility that inhibiting triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells-1 (TREM-1) and Dendritic cell-associated C-type lectin-1(Dectin-1) could modulate the innate immune response and alleviate the severity of corneal fungal keratitis.
The expression of TREM-1 and Dectin-1 increased significantly and correlated positively with the progression of fungal keratitis.
TREM-1 and Dectin-1 function concurrently in the corneal innate immune response by regulating inflammatory cytokine expression in fungal keratitis.
To observe Dectin-1 expression in fungal keratitis on rat models and to determine the role of Dectin-1 in innate immune response to Aspergillus fumigatus.
Dectin-1 in early period of innate immune responses in rat fungal keratitis might work through IL-1Beta, IL-6, CCL2, CXCL1, CXCL2 to recruit neutrophils and macrophages to participate anti-fungal immunity.
The concentrations of sTM and sEPCR in 19 CVST patients without protein C and protein S deficiency were measured by ELISA and compared with 53 healthy controls.
Methylation of cytosine residues in DNA samples, collected before and serially after cobalamin treatment from patients with cobalamin deficiency, was studied using restriction endonucleases Hpa II and Msp I and an epsilon globin gene probe.
The most frequent germline mutations responsible for non syndromic congenital sideroblastic anemia are identified in ALAS2 and SLC25A38 genes.
Our multicentre retrospective descriptive study compared the strategies for diagnosis and management of congenital sideroblastic anemia during the follow-up of six patients with an ALAS2 mutation and seven patients with an SLC25A38 mutation.
In the current paper, a case of X-linked sideroblastic anemia caused by a novel homozygous deletional mutation in exon 10 of ALAS2 gene is presented.
The first intronic mutations in the intron 1 GATA site (int-1-GATA) of 5-aminolevulinate synthase 2 (ALAS2) have been identified in X-linked sideroblastic anemia (XLSA) pedigrees, strongly suggesting it could be causal mutations of XLSA.
Mutations in the C-terminus of human erythroid 5-aminolevulinate synthase (hALAS2), a pyridoxal 5'-phosphate (PLP)-dependent enzyme, are associated with two different blood disorders, X-linked sideroblastic anemia (XLSA) and X-linked protoporphyria (XLPP).
XLSA-causing mutations yield hALAS2 variants with decreased activity, while XLPP-causing mutations result in a gain-of-function of hALAS2.
Isonicotinic acid hydrazide (isoniazid, INH), an antituberculosis agent, can cause sideroblastic anemia as a side-effect, by limiting PLP availability to hALAS2, via inhibition of pyridoxal kinase or reaction with pyridoxal to form pyridoxal isonicotinoyl hydrazone.
Mendelian mutations in ALAS2 are a cause of sideroblastic anemia and erythropoietic protoporphyria.
XLSA is caused by mutations in the erythroid-specific gene coding 5-aminolevulinate synthase (ALAS2).
We report four patients with XLSA and three mutations in ALAS2: c.611G&gt;A (p.Arg204Gln), c.1218G&gt;T (p.Leu406Phe) and c.1499A&gt;G (p.Tyr500Cys).
Delta-aminolevulinic acid synthase 2 (ALAS2 ) polymorphism is used as a marker for X-linked sideroblastic anemia.
POMT1 mutations cause a wide spectrum of clinical conditions from Walker-Warburg syndrome (WWS), which involves muscle, eye and brain abnormalities, to mild forms of limb-girdle muscular dystrophy with mental retardation.
We report five Chinese patients with POMT1 mutations: one had a typical clinical manifestation of WWS, and the other four were diagnosed with congenital muscular dystrophy with mental retardation of varying severity.
We report two siblings of Croatian consanguineous healthy parents with a novel homozygous missense mutation in the POMT1 gene, presenting with intellectual disability and psychotic, in particular hallucinatory symptoms and abnormal brain MRIs, preceding classical symptoms of limb-girdle muscular dystrophy by several years.
Within this group mutations in the protein O-mannosyltransferase genes (POMT1 and POMT2) are known to cause a spectrum of CMD disorders including the Walker-Warburg Syndrome with severe brain and ocular malformations, and the limb girdle muscular dystrophy with and without mental retardation.
Clinical phenotype in POMT1-mutated patients ranges from congenital muscular dystrophy (CMD) with structural brain abnormalities, to limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD) with microcephaly and mental retardation, to mild LGMD.
We report three patients who harbored compound heterozygous POMT1 mutations and showed left ventricular (LV) dilation and/or decrease in myocardial contractile force: two had a LGMD phenotype with a normal or close-to-normal cognitive profile and one had CMD with mental retardation and normal brain MRI.
SLIT2 is a candidate tumor suppressor gene and recent studies have shown that SLIT2 expression is suppressed or reduced by hypermethylation in the promoter region in various cancers.
The aim of this study was to investigate the association between SLIT2 promoter methylation and nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) and its relative diagnostic ability for NPC.
This study is to investigate the methylation status of multiple tumor suppressor 1 (p16), secreted glycoprotein 2 (SLIT2), scavenger receptor class A, member 5 putative (SCARA5), and human runt-related transcription factor 3 (Runx3) genes in the peripheral blood of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).This is a case-control study.
Publicly-available data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) was mined to compare the levels of miR-218 and its host gene SLIT2/3 between lung cancer tissues and normal lung tissues.
Finally, a PML/SLIT1 axis regulates sensitivity to the PML-targeting drug arsenic trioxide in primary GBM cells.
We previously showed that Slit2-Robo1 inhibit cell migration in colorectal cancer (CRC).
Reduced NO release and/or nNOS expression are suspicious in a subset of patients with functional dyspepsia.
Disturbances of the allele-specific CTCF binding are causative for imprinting disorders like the Silver-Russell syndrome (SRS) or the Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS), the latter one being associated with a dramatically increased risk to develop nephroblastomas.
Imprinting of the IGF2/H19 locus and the CDKN1C/KCNQ1 locus on chromosome 11p15.5 is mediated by CTCF, and this regulation is lost in BWS, leading to aberrant overexpression of growth-promoting genes.
Therefore, we propose that loss of CTCF-dependent imprinting of tumor-promoting genes, such as IGF2 and TERT, results from a defective TGF-Beta pathway and is responsible at least in part for BWS-associated tumorigenesis as well as sporadic human cancers that are frequently associated with SPTBN1 and SMAD3 mutations.
By analyzing data from various libraries, like miRbase and ENCODE, we show a prevalence of various cancer-related genes, miRNAs, and regulatory binding sites, such as CTCF within CFSs.
Not only ICR1 microdeletions involving the CTCF-binding site, but also point mutations and a small deletion of the OCT-binding site have been shown to trigger methylation defects in BWS.
We highlight the networks of interactions between AR, Ca2+ and ATP2B1, where the extracellular proteins thrombospondin-1, gelsolin and integrinBeta1 were previously reported as regulators for cancer progression and metastasis, indicating the potential role of EV-derived proteins in mediating calcium homoeostasis under AR inhibition by enzalutamide.
Here, we demonstrate that gelsolin, a constituent of ejaculate, induces apoptosis of activated lymphocytes in prostate cancer.
Gelsolin was highly expressed in prostate cancer cells, and was associated with tumor progression, recurrence, metastasis, and poor prognosis.
Epigenetic repression of the tumor suppressor gelsolin (GSN) is frequently observed in cancers.
In this study, we investigated the role of tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) in DNA methylation of the GSN gene during gastric cancer progression.
Immunofluorescence staining of 121 gastric cancer tissues showed aberrant localization of GSN and DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) and juxtaposition of DNMT1 and M2 TAMs.
Decreased GSN protein and mRNA expression and increased DNA methylation in the GSN promoter were observed in gastric cancer cell lines and clinical specimens.
To examine the effect of TAMs on DNA methylation in gastric cancer cells, we performed in vitro coculture assays and found increased DNMT1 expression but decreased GSN expression in gastric cancer cells after coculture with U937 cells.
Knockdown of DNMT1 expression in gastric cancer cells could abort U937 coculture-mediated GSN downregulation.
Inhibiting DNMT1 activity with procainamide, inhibiting DNA methylation with 5-AZA, or inhibiting CCL5/CCR5 signaling with maraviroc reduced tumor growth in vivo In conclusion, upregulation of DNMT1 by CCL5/CCR5/STAT3 signaling is critical for TAM-mediated GSN silencing in gastric cancer.
Basal cell cancers (BCCs) are characterized by up-regulation of Hedgehog pathway through loss of Patched1 or activation of Smoothened, and smoothened-inhibitors such as vismodegib are effective therapies for advanced BCCs.
Furthermore, the cancer risks for Cd, Cr and Ni over a lifetime of exposure were higher in all treatments than the tolerable limit (1.00E-4 to 1.00E-6), however BCNs addition significantly suppressed cancer risk compared to control.
Nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome (NBCCS) is a rare autosomal dominant disease with a complex genetic etiology.
Among them ZFHX4 had been already identified as a new basal cell carcinoma susceptibility loci through a genome-wide association study (GWAS) and was considered the most likely pathogenic gene for this NBCCS family.
The autosomal recessive forms (LGMD2) are: LGMD2A (calpain 3), LGMD2B (dysferlin), LGMD2C (Gamma sarcoglycan), LGMD2D (Alfa sarcoglycan), LGMD2E (Beta sarcoglycan), LGMD2F (Delta sarcoglycan), LGMD2G (telethonin), LGMD2H (TRIM32), LGMD2I (FKRP), LGMD2J (titin), LGMD2K (POMT1), LGMD2L (anoctamin 5), LGMD2M (fukutin), LGMD2N (POMT2), LGMD2O (POMTnG1), LGMD2P (dystroglycan), LGMD2Q (plectin), LGMD2R (desmin), LGMD2S (TRAPPC11), LGMD2T (GMPPB), LGMD2U (ISPD), LGMD2V (Glucosidase, alpha ), LGMD2W (PINCH2).
TMAO promotes the atherosclerosis in vivo and in vitro.CD36/MAPK/JNK pathway may play a crucial role in TMAO-induced formation of foam cells.
To determine whether deletion of JNK2 prevents high blood pressure and atherosclerosis known to be induced by vitamin D deficiency in mice, we generated mice with knockout of JNK2 in a background susceptible to diet-induced atherosclerosis (LDLR-/-).
Moreover, deletion of JNK2 reduced HFD-induced atherosclerosis by 30% in the proximal aorta when compared to control mice fed vitamin D-deficient diets.
These data suggest that JNK2 signaling activation is necessary for the atherosclerosis and hypertension induced by vitamin D deficiency.
We developed a model of vestibular schwannoma growth that takes into account the effect of vascular endothelial growth factors and mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 on tumor growth.
The preponderance of mTOR activation was found in tumors of peripheral nerve sheath (malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor and schwannoma), skeletal muscle origin (rhabdomyosarcoma), and in those exhibiting epithelial nature (chordoma and synovial sarcoma).
A random sample of 149 probands with unilateral cleft lip +/- palate was ascertained from 2 Los Angeles area hospitals.
Accordingly, CXCL10 could not fully rescue CD27 deficiency in mice infected with influenza virus.
Mice defective in spermiogenesis (Tnp1(-/-), Gmcl1(-/-), Asm(-/-)) showed wild-type mid-preleptotene and bouquet frequencies.
The noncoding miRNA-34a (miR-34a) is involved in Alzheimer's disease (AD) pathologenesis and shows potential for application as a biomarker for early diagnosis and intervention.
To explore the regulatory role of miR-34a in aging-related diseases such as Alzheimer's disease (AD) during exercise intervention, we constructed a rat model with d-galactose (d-gal)-induced oxidative stress and cognitive impairment coupled with dysfunctional autophagy and abnormal mitochondrial dynamics, determined the mitigation of cognitive impairment of d-gal-induced aging rats during swimming intervention, and evaluated miR-34a-mediated functional status of autophagy and abnormal mitochondrial dynamics.
In this study, we showed that presenilin (PS)-2, a major gene associated with familial Alzheimer's disease (AD) could trigger the apoptosis through the p53/miR-34a axis in PC12 cells.
A major protein constituent of a rat islet cell tumour that exhibited Ca2+-dependent changes in electrophoretic mobility has been purified to homogeneity and compared in its physicochemical and biological properties with bovine brain and rat brain calmodulin (synonymous with phosphodiesterase activator protein, calcium-dependent regulator, troponin C-like protein and modulator protein).
The top 3 reasons for choosing contralateral prophylactic mastectomy were (1) decreasing the risk of contralateral breast disease (97%), (2) peace of mind (96%), and (3) improved survival (93%).
The top 3 causes of death from 2009 to 2013 were cancer, cerebrovascular disease, and cardiopathy, with the role of cardiopathy increasing over time (P&lt;0.01).
The top 3 causes of DALY were skin and subcutaneous diseases, iron-deficiency anemia and road injuries, resulting in DALY (constituent ratio) of 1 411 (10.5%), 1 094 (8.1%) and 1 029 (7.6%) thousand years respectively.
The adult group had results of Dermatophagoides pteryonysinus (71%), Dermatophagoides farina (72%), and Blomia tropicalis (59%); the adult food allergy category, the top 3 allergens were egg white (13%), milk (6%) and soya bean (5%).
Also good results could be respected by cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil based neoadjuvant chemotherapy before radiotherapy plus interferon beta as a maintenance therapy in childhood aggressive nasopharyngeal carcinoma.
Treating pediatric nasopharyngeal carcinoma patients with the Al-Sarraf protocol could be a feasible modality, as observed in this clinical case, despite the elevated cost of using interferon-beta in low-income countries when using more advanced radiotherapy techniques such as conformal radiotherapy and now, modulated intensity radiotherapy.
Preliminary results of combined neoadjuvant chemotherapy, radiotherapy, and postradiation interferon beta (IFN-beta) in children and adolescents with nasopharyngeal carcinoma, especially in high-risk patients, have been promising.
Here, we report that CAB39 was frequently up-regulated in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), which was significantly associated with tumor metastasis (P = 0.000), poorer disease-free survival rate (P = 0.027), and poor prognosis (P = 0.000).
In glioma cell lines, we found that decreased miR-451 expression suppressed tumor cell proliferation but enhanced migration with a concomitant low level of CAB39/AMPK/mTOR pathway activation and high level of Rac1/cofilin pathway activation, respectively.
By targeting CAB 39, miRNA-451 likely triggers the LKB1/AMPK/PI3K/AKT pathway, which regulates GLUT1, to inhibit the glucose metabolism of, reduce the energy supply to, and inhibit the proliferation and invasion of glioma cells.
Our recent work revealed the activation mechanism of GCKIIIs by MO25, as well as how GCKIIIs heterodimerize with CCM3, a molecular bridge between GCKIII and striatins.
We evaluated transglutaminase 5 expression in comparison with proliferating (keratin 14) and differentiating (transglutaminase 3) markers in different diseases, such as psoriasis, ichthyosis vulgaris, lamellar ichthyosis, and Darier's disease.
Here we investigated the cutaneous CD32A and CD89 expression in relation to the neutrophil elastase (NE) expression and serum level of anti-desmoglein 1 and 3 (DSG1/DSG3) IgG in pemphigus, anti-BP180/BP230 IgG in bullous pemphigoid (BP), anti-gliadin nonapeptides (npG), tissue (tTG), and epidermal transglutaminases (eTG) IgA in dermatitis herpetiformis (DH).
Pemphigus and bullous pemphigoid (BP) are identified by autoantibodies (abs) against desmoglein 1, 3 (DSG1/3) and BP180/BP230, respectively.
To define cut-off values for Dsg1, Dsg3, and BP180, we evaluated 47 serum samples from patients with pemphigus foliaceus (PF), 59 from those with pemphigus vulgaris (PV), 52 from those with bullous pemphigoid (BP), and 995 from healthy individuals.
Serum anti-skin antibodies were significantly higher in the patients than in the controls (p = 0.008, p &lt; 0.001, p &lt; 0.001, p &lt; 0.001 and p &lt; 0.001 for desmoglein 1 (DSG1) desmoglein 3 (DSG3), bullous pemphigoid 180 (BP180), BP230 and type VII collagen (COL7), respectively).
BRIP1 is a BRCA1 associated protein that is mutated in a fraction of familial breast cancer and Fanconi anemia cases.
Our previous studies of intraperitoneal ovarian carcinoma in a mouse model demonstrated that bikunin gene transfection could prevent ascites formation and intraperitoneal disseminated metastasis.
The authors initially evaluated the therapeutic efficacy of once-daily oral administration of different doses of bikunin against human ovarian carcinoma HRA cells growing in the peritonea of nude mice.
The current study was the first to report the potent activity of once-daily oral administration of bikunin against ovarian carcinoma.
In previous studies, the authors showed that various types of cultured tumor cells treated with exogenous bikunin protein or ovarian carcinoma cells transfected with bikunin cDNA have low invasiveness and diminished metastatic potential.
The data suggest that low bikunin mRNA expression by ovarian carcinoma cells may be associated with poor prognosis.
It is conceivable that testing for bikunin mRNA may identify patients with ovarian carcinoma who are at high risk for early disease recurrence and a poor prognosis.
Infiltration of inflammatory cells into the lungs was significantly increased; NK1R-/- animals also exhibited increased pulmonary edema, hemorrhage, and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid protein levels.
Finally, treatment (10 mg/kg im) with SR-140333B, an NK-1R antagonist, significantly prevented 20-min FS-induced hypoxemia and pulmonary edema 24 h after insult.
Our data suggested that BMP4, MGP, TGFBI, and SPHK1 may be important in CAFs-associated NSCLC, and the abnormal expression and high LOH frequency of them may be used as the diagnosis targets of CAFs in NSCLC.
Moreover, increased expression of p21, transforming growth factor (TGF)-Beta inducible early gene-1 (TIEG1) and TGF beta-induced (TGFBI) was observed in lung cancer cells after Cul4A knockdown, which may be partially related to increased chemosensitivity to gemcitabine.
Transforming growth factor Beta-induced (TGFBI) has been implicated as a tumor suppressor, which enhances gemcitabine chemosensitivity in lung cancer cells.
We observed that knockdown of Cul4A was associated with increased sensitivity to gemcitabine through upregulation of TGFBI in lung cancer cells.
EGFR, KDR, FN1, TGFBI and PCNA may interact with VEGFA to play important roles in NSCLC tumorigenesis.
Using a small series of stage IV non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients, we previously suggested the usefulness of TGFBI as a prognostic and predictive factor in chemotherapy-treated late-stage NSCLC.
In order to validate and extend these results, we broaden the analysis and studied TGFBI expression in a large series of samples obtained from stage I-IV NSCLC patients.
TGFBI expression was assessed by immunohistochemistry in 364 completely resected primary NSCLC samples: 242 adenocarcinomas (ADCs) and 122 squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs).
TGFBI may be useful for the identification of a subset of NSCLC who may benefit from adjuvant therapy.
Loss of TGFBI expression has been described in several cancers including lung carcinoma, and it has been suggested to act as a tumor suppressor gene.
To address the importance of TGFBI expression in cancer progression, we determined its expression in NSCLC clinical samples using immunohistochemistry.
Furthermore, we transiently over-expressed and silenced TGFBI in human NSCLC cell lines.
Among 50 lung cancer samples, 44.0% (22/50) harbored methylated CpG sites in the TGFBI promoter.
An analysis correlating gene methylation status with clinicopathological cancer features revealed that dense methylation of the TGFBI promoter was associated with a metastatic phenotype, with 42.9% (6/14) of metastatic lung cancer samples demonstrating dense methylation vs. only 5.6% (2/36) of primary lung cancer samples (p &lt; 0.05).
Similar to these lung cancer results, 82.0% (41/50) of prostate cancer samples harbored methylated CpG sites in the TGFBI promoter, and dense methylation of the promoter was present in 38.9% (7/18) of prostate cancer samples with the feature of locoregional invasiveness vs. only 19.4% (6/31) of prostate cancer samples without locoregional invasiveness (p &lt; 0.05).
Dense methylation of the TGFBI promoter correlated with the extent of TGFBI gene silencing in tumor cell lines and was related to invasiveness of prostate tumors and metastatic status of lung cancer tumors.
Thus, TGFBI promoter methylation can be used as a potential prognostic marker for invasiveness and metastasis in prostate and lung cancer patients, respectively.
Subunits B and C and 3-ketoacyl-CoA thiolase were detected in fibroblasts of controls and X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy patients, but not of Zellweger patients.
The CA4+ CECT attenuation obtained from imaging ex vivo human hip cartilage correlates with the glycosaminoglycan content, equilibrium modulus, and coefficient of friction, which are key indicators of cartilage functional performance and osteoarthritis stage.
This study describes the regulation of EMT in RPE cells by TGF-Beta1/miR-124/RHOG signaling and suggests that the supplement of miR-124 exogenously would be a valuable therapeutic approach for the prevention or treatment of proliferative vitreoretinopathy.
The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of limb ischemic preconditioning (LIPC) on myocardial apoptosis in myocardial ischemia-reperfusion injury (MIRI), as well as the regulation of caspase-3 and the B cell lymphoma 2 (Bcl-2) gene in LIPC.
Together with PDXK, 84 additional factors were identified that influence the response of NSCLC cells to cisplatin, in vitro including the hepatic lipase LIPC.
Here, we report that the intratumoral levels of LIPC, as assessed by immunohistochemistry in two independent cohorts of NSCLC patients, positively correlate with disease outcome.
In one out of two cohorts studied, the overall survival of NSCLC patients bearing LIPChigh lesions was unaffected, if not slightly worsened, by cisplatin-based adjuvant therapy.
Pending validation in appropriate clinical series, these results suggest that LIPClow NSCLC patients would be those who mainly benefit from adjuvant cisplatin therapy.
Thus, the expression levels of LIPC appear to have an independent prognostic value (and perhaps a predictive potential) in the setting of NSCLC.
If these findings were confirmed by additional studies, LIPC expression levels might allow not only for NSCLC patient stratification, but also for the implementation of personalized therapeutic approaches.
Here, extensive immunohistochemical analysis was performed on a tissue microarray, containing 135 ovarian cancer cases obtained during tumor debulking detecting 15 key lymphocyte markers such as CD3, CD4, and CD20, as well as activation and immunomodulatory molecules such as TIA-1 and PD-L1.
The observed total improvement in the survival rate of the second time period is followed by an increase in conservative surgery in stage TIA1, a reduction in the use of adjuvant radiotherapy among operable stages Tlbl, Tlb2 and T2A, while the treatment of locally advanced cervical cancer did not differ significantly.
Meckel syndrome (MKS) is an inherited autosomal recessive hepatorenal fibrocystic syndrome, caused by mutations in TMEM67, characterized by occipital encephalocoele, renal cysts, hepatic fibrosis, and polydactyly.
Electroencephalographic study showed that TonEBP (+/-) mice reduced seizure frequency and severity compared with wild type during KA-induced status epilepticus.
Among frequently-used tumor markers in lung cancer, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and carbohydrate antigen 125 (CA125), cytokeratin 19 (CYFRA21-1) and squamous carcinoma antigen (SCC), neuron specific enolase (NSE) and pro-gastrin-releasing peptide (ProGRP) are respectively expressed highly in lung adenocarcinoma, lung squamous carcinoma and small cell lung cancer.
#背#景#与#目#的 #肺#癌#的#常#用#肿#瘤#标#志#物#中, #癌#胚#抗#原 (carcinoembryonic antigen, CEA) #与#糖#类#抗#原125 (carbohydrate antigen 125, CA125) #、#细#胞#角#蛋#白19#片#段 (cytokeratin 19, CYFRA21-1) #与#鳞#状#细#胞#癌#抗#原 (squamous carcinoma antigen, SCC) #、#神#经#元#特#异#性#烯#醇#化#酶 (neuron specific enolase, NSE) #与#胃#泌#素#释#放#肽#前#体 (pro-gastrin-releasing peptide, ProGRP) #分#别#在#肺#腺#癌#、#肺#鳞#状#细#胞#癌#和#小#细#胞#肺#癌#中#有#较#高#表#达#。#本#研#究#旨#在#通#过#对#比#多#项#肿#瘤#标#志#物#异#常 (A#组) #和#仅CEA#和/#或CA125#异#常 (B#组) #的#两#组#晚#期#肺#腺#癌#患#者, #探#讨#多#项#肿#瘤#标#志#物#异#常#在#疗#效#评#价#和#预#测#复#发#方#面#的#价#值#。#方#法 #纳#入#中#国#医#学#科#学#院#肿#瘤#医#院#的IV#期#肺#腺#癌#初#治#病#例, #回#顾#性#分#析#其#临#床#数#据, #包#括#临#床#特#征#、#治#疗#前#的#血#清#肿#瘤#标#志#物#水#平#、#疗#效#及#无#进#展#生#存#期#。#结#果 #除CEA#和CA125#外, A#组#异#常#比#率#最#高#的#肿#瘤#标#志#物#是CYFRA21-1 (93%) , #其#次#是NSE (36%) #、SCC (13%) #和ProGRP (12%) #。#多#项#肿#瘤#标#志#物#异#常#的#患#者#更#易#出#现#远#处#多#部#位#转#移 (P&lt;0.001) , #治#疗#后#的#无#进#展#生#存#期#更#短 (#中#位#时#间5.3#个#月 vs 7.3#个#月, P=0.016) #。#两#组#中#进#行#维#持#治#疗#的#患#者#均#比#未#行#维#持#治#疗#的#患#者#复#发#风#险#低 (P#均&lt;0.001) #。#结#论 #多#项#肿#瘤#标#志#物#异#常#患#者#复#发#风#险#高, #维#持#治#疗#可#降#低#复#发#风#险#。.
The authors built a model for lung cancer diagnosis previously based on the blood biomarkers progastrin-releasing peptide (ProGRP), carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), squamous cell carcinoma antigen (SCC), and cytokeratin 19 fragment (CYFRA21-1).
We aimed to explore whether squamous cell carcinoma antigen (SCC), cytokeratin 19 fragment (Cyfra21-1), neuron-specific enolase (NSE), and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) are elevated in diabetic nephropathy (DN) and the association between urinary albumin-to-creatinine ratio (UACR) and tumor markers in diabetic patients.
CK19 fragment Cyfra 21-1 is useful tumor marker for squamous cell carcinoma, but its clinical value in OSCC has not been confirmed.
The objective of this study was to assess the value of human squamous cell carcinoma-associated antigen (SCC-Ag) and cytokeratin 19 fragment antigen 21-1 (CYFRA21-1) in evaluation of patients with nonbulky early-stage squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix to determine if radiotherapy is warranted after radical surgery.
In this review, we discuss the molecular features, functions, and clinical relevance of the conventional serum biomarkers for lung cancer, including carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), cytokeratin 19 fragment 21-1 (CYFRA 21-1), tissue polypeptide antigen (TPA), carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9), sialyl Lewisx (sLex), carbohydrate antigen 125 (CA-125), squamous cell carcinoma-related antigen (SCC-Ag), neuron-specific enolase (NSE), and pro-gastrin-releasing peptide (proGRP), aiming to provide a snapshot of the current landscape and their potential combined utility in the diagnosis and prognosis of lung cancer.
We detected three FBN1 mutations in two patients (aged 24 and 25 years) displaying aortic root aneurysm &gt;=50 mm and moderate aortic regurgitation.
Severe heritable elastic fibre diseases are caused by mutations in elastic fibre components; for example, mutations in elastin cause supravalvular aortic stenosis and autosomal dominant cutis laxa, mutations in fibrillin-1 cause Marfan syndrome and Weill-Marchesani syndrome, and mutations in fibulins-4 and -5 cause autosomal recessive cutis laxa.
An alteration of the elastin (Eln) or fibrillin (Fbn) gene products leads to severe genetic pathologies of the cardiovascular system, such as supravalvular aortic stenosis, or Williams Beuren syndrome--in which elastin deficiency induces aortic stenoses--or Marfan syndrome, in which on the contrary fibrillin-1 deficiency promotes the appearance of aortic aneurysms.
Even though elastin and fibrillin-1 are the major structural components of elastic fibers, mutations in elastin and fibrillin-1 lead to narrowing of large arteries in supravalvular aortic stenosis and dilation of the ascending aorta in Marfan syndrome, respectively.
Immunoperoxidase examination of the skin biopsy specimens from patients with atopic dermatitis and psoriasis revealed enhanced expression of amphiregulin, NGF, and PGP9.5, appearance of positively stained epidermal nerve fibers, and decreased expression of the nerve reduction factor semaphorin 3A in all cases.
Expression of neural marker PGP9.5, amphiregulin, semaphorin-3A, calcitonin gene-related peptide and its receptor, nerve growth factor and its receptor, substance P and its receptor, and expression frequency were analyzed in biopsy specimens from patients with atopic dermatitis and psoriasis and healthy volunteers by immunohistochemical method.
Expression of semaphorin-3A in patients with atopic dermatitis was less frequent than in the control.
We also show how sema3A plays a role in the pathogenesis of allergic rhinitis and atopic dermatitis.
Thus, the mechanism by which high levels of km23-1 suppress ovarian carcinoma growth in vitro and inhibit ovary tumor formation in vivo appears to involve a BubR1-related mitotic delay.
This study was designed to create an experimental varicocele model by a simple surgical procedure in dog with minimum invasion and to investigate the effect of varicocele-induced infertility on the expression of six related genes (HSP90, HSP70, IL- 4, TNF, KITLG and KIT receptor).
Expressions of HSP90, TNF, KITLG and the KIT-receptor gene were significantly downregulated (P=0.029, 0.047, 0.004 and 0.035 respectively) in varicocele-induced testes while HSP70 was upregulated (P=0.018).
Subjects with high baseline levels of SCF had lower cardiovascular (n = 340) and all-cause mortality (n = 1159) as well as a lower risk of heart failure (n = 177), stroke (n = 318) and myocardial infarction (n = 452).
The highest SCF quartile remained independently associated with a lower risk of a lower risk of cardiovascular [hazard ratio and 95% confidence interval 0.59 (0.43-0.81)] and all-cause mortality [0.68 (0.57-0.81)], heart failure [0.50 (0.31-0.80)] and stroke [0.66 (0.47-0.92)], but not with MI [0.96 (0.72-1.27)] as compared with the lowest quartile when adjusting for traditional cardiovascular risk factors in Cox proportional hazard regression models.
These data suggest that a stroke-damaged brain is repairable by SCF + G-CSF even 6 months after the lesion occurs.
Preload-recruitable stroke work was significantly higher in pigs after SCF treatment (Ad.SCF, 55.5+/-11.6 mm Hg versus Ad.Beta-gal, 31.6+/-12.6 mm Hg, P=0.005), indicating enhanced cardiac function.
In the chronic stages, SCF gene transfer was associated with improved cardiac function in a preclinical model of ischemic cardiomyopathy.
Five proteins were found to be significantly upregulated in patients with allergic rhinitis (apolipoprotein A-2 [APOA2], 9.7-fold; Alfa2-macroglobulin [A2M], 4.5-fold; apolipoprotein A-1 [APOA1], 3.2-fold; Alfa1-antitrypsin [SERPINA1], 2.5-fold; and complement C3 [C3], 2.3-fold) and 5 were found to be downregulated (antileukoproteinase [SLPI], 0.6-fold; WAP 4-disulfide core domain protein [WFDC2], 0.5-fold; haptoglobin [HP], 0.7-fold; IgJ chain [IGJ], 0.7-fold; and Ig hc V-III region BRO, 0.8-fold) compared with levels seen in healthy control subjects.
The concentrations of C-reactive protein (CRP), serum amyloid A, haptoglobin (Hp) and Alfa(1)-acid glycoprotein were measured in dogs with clinical signs of nasal disease and compared with those of healthy dogs in order to determine the expression of these proteins in cases of canine nasal disease.
The acute phase reaction, in association with progressive atrophic rhinitis (AR), was monitored for 3 wk using serum haptoglobin (HPT) quantification in thirty-six, 15 kg swine after intranasal challenge with varying doses of Pasteurella multocida type D (toxigenic strain) and Bordetella bronchiseptica.
Recent reports on altered distribution amongst individuals with heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) prompted us to examine the Fc gammaRIIA polymorphism in a cohort of patients with refractory idiopathic (immune) thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP), in whom severe disease had required them to undergo splenectomy.
Fluorine- 18-FDG PET/CT can be used for treatment response evaluation of angiomyolipoma treated with mTOR-inhibitors.
International TSC guidelines recommend mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitors as first-line therapy for management of asymptomatic, growing angiomyolipomas &gt;3 cm in diameter.
This review discusses data regarding patient outcomes that were used to develop current guidelines for embolization of renal angiomyolipomas and presents recent data on 2 available mTOR inhibitors - sirolimus and everolimus - in the treatment of angiomyolipoma.
The authors propose a hypothesis for mTORC1 haploinsufficiency as an additional mechanism for CKD and propose that preventive therapy with mTOR inhibitors might have a role in reducing the number of angiomyolipoma-related deaths.
Based on recent evidence, new guidelines should be considered that support the earlier initiation of mTOR inhibitor therapy for the management of renal angiomyolipomas to prevent future serious complications, rather than try to rescue patients after the complications have occurred.
The exosome-mediated mechanisms may also operate in the cells of angiomyolipoma (AML), which develops as a result of mutations in TSC1/TSC2 genes in TSC patients, because we observed the reactivation of mammalian target of rapamycin and Notch pathways, driven by the delivery of Rheb and Notch1 esRNA, in AML cells depleted of Rheb that were treated with the exosomes purified from AML cells with the constitutively high Rheb levels.
Mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitors are recommended as first-line treatment of renal angiomyolipoma associated with tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) or sporadic lymphangioleiomyomatosis (sporadic LAM), but follow-up is limited.
These data indicate that the GluN2B and GluN2D NMDA receptor subunits contribute to synaptic activity in the STN and may represent potential therapeutic targets for modulating subthalamic neuron activity in neurological disorders such as Parkinson's disease.
We have also examined whether this function of GluN2D-containing NMDARs is altered in a mouse model of Parkinson's disease.
GluN2D might constitute an attractive target for the development of novel pharmacological tools for therapeutic intervention in Parkinson's disease.
A stratification by results of the DRE (1 = normal, 2 = benign prostatic hyperplasia, 3 = prostate cancer suspected) yielded the following values: DRE 1: 2.40 versus 2.47; DRE 2: 2.99 versus 2.75; DRE 3: 3.64 versus 3.81; the difference was not significant for all three groups.
In a previous study, we showed by gene knockdown using siRNA and gene overexpression experiments that Dnaj (Hsp40) homolog, subfamily B, member 8 (DNAJB8), a role in the maintenance, of renal cell carcinoma CSCs/CICs.
In the present study, we established Dnajb8 knockout (KO) renal cell carcinoma (RCC) line cells (RenCa cells) and analyzed the cells to confirm the function of Dnajb8 in RCC CSCs/CICs.
In this study, we show that the cancer-testis antigen and HSP40 family member DNAJB8 contributes to the CSC phenotype in renal cell carcinoma (RCC).
To study the effects of suppressed alpha-mannosidase Man2c1 gene expression on EC9706 human esophageal carcinoma cells, the cells were treated with short interfering RNA.
The data imply that induction of mitotic arrest and consequent apoptosis resulted from microtubule disorganization, which appears to be one of the major cellular mechanisms by which suppressed expression of the Man2c1 gene causes growth inhibition of EC9706 esophageal carcinoma cells.
The result showed that the number of cases of esophageal epithelial papilloma, the average number of tumor and the incidence of esophageal cancer in the experimental group were lower than those in the control group (MANA only), though no statistical significant difference was found.
The extent of both the decrease in peroxisomal VLCS activity and the very long-chain fatty acid accumulation in the yeast FAT1 deletion model resembles that observed in cells from X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy patients.
PSG9 was reported as a potential predictive biomarker of pre-eclampsia, a serious complication of pregnancy that has been related to immunological dysfunction at the fetal-maternal interface.
The study was designed as retrospective, and vimentin, Ki67, and CD44 expressions were evaluated by immunohistochemistry in 53 pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma cases.
This study was purposed to analyze the methylation status of death-associated protein kinase (dapk) gene promoter in Chinese patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and its relationship with clinical features.
We recently reported that both Survivin and its binding protein Borealin in the CPC complex are essential for the development of hepatocellular carcinoma, suggesting that disrupting the interaction between Survivin and Borealin would be a promising strategy.
The expression levels of four CPC proteins - aurora B kinase (AURKB), borealin, inner centromere protein (INCENP), and survivin - were evaluated using immunohistochemistry in an independent cohort of NSCLC specimens.
High expressions of AURKB, INCENP, and survivin, but not borealin, were associated with shorter survival in patients with NSCLC.
In silico analysis further indicated that CDCA8 overexpressed in breast cancer tissues compared with the normal controls is significantly associated with the triple-negative phenotype.
Experimentally, we performed a immunohistochemical study to detect the expression of CDCA8 in 112 breast cancer samples, and evaluated its clinicopathological and prognostic significance.
We found that CDCA8 was frequently over-expressed in breast cancer tissues, and increased expression of CDCA8 was positively associated with FOXM1 expression, triple-negative phenotype and shorter overall survival.
Our results suggest that FOXM1-CDCA8 signature might be involved in breast cancer progression, and serves as a potential prognostic factor and a promising therapeutical target.
The major forms of primary liver cancer are hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (iCCA).
Primary liver cancer comprises hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (iCCA), and other rare tumors, notably fibrolamellar carcinoma and hepatoblastoma.
The study group was composed of those patients who were transplanted for hepatocellular carcinoma or decompensated cirrhosis and found to have an iCCA at explant pathology.
Between January 2000 and December 2013, 81 patients were found to have an iCCA at explant; 33 had separate nodules of iCCA and hepatocellular carcinoma, and 48 had only iCCA (study group).
Intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (iCCA) is a treatment-refractory primary liver cancer with an increasing incidence and mortality worldwide in recent years.
In a newly diagnosed patient with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and complex cytogenetics and negative for gene mutations associated with myeloid neoplasms, RNA sequencing by next-generation sequencing (NGS) through a large cancer-related gene panel showed ETV6-LYN leukemic fusion transcript.
The upregulation of the Lyn/Syk-mediated PI3K p110Delta isoform in SW480 cells and the Lyn-dependent PI3K p110Alfa isoform in SW620 cells triggered fatty acid production and cell motility in IGF-1-activated colon cancer cells.
We report here that Btk negatively regulates, through its tyrosine kinase activity, the FasL-mediated cell death in epithelial cell lines from colon cancer origin.
We used a series of patient-derived three-dimensional colon cancer cultures and studied their response to stimulation with CD95 ligand (CD95L).
Multiple TLRs such as TLR2, TLR3, TLR4, and TLR9, as well as other receptors, can be expressed in cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma.
About 53 and 85% of hepatocellular carcinoma patients frequently express TLR3 and TLR9, respectively.
Only this combination prevented subsequent tumour spread and resulted in a significantly improved survival, justifying the need for further exploration of the combination of ablative therapies and TLR9 agonists in liver cancer.
In Myelodysplastic Syndromes (MDS) PI-PLCBeta1 has a genetic and epigenetic relevance and it is related to MDS patients' risk of Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML) evolution.
Investigation of the interplay between ROS, PI-PLCBeta1, and their signaling mediators in leukemia might therefore reveal innovative targets of pharmacological therapy in the treatment for leukemia.
Phosphoinositide-phospholipase C (PI-PLC) Beta1 is involved in both genetic and epigenetic mechanisms of MDS progression to acute myeloid leukemia.
The evidence, in a number of patients with myelodysplastic syndromes, that the mono-allelic deletion of PLCBeta1 is associated with an increased risk of developing acute myeloid leukemia paves the way for an entirely new field of investigation.
Indeed, the recent discovery of a possible involvement of the interstitial deletion of PLCbeta1 gene in the progression of myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) to acute myeloid leukemia in humans (AML) strengthens this contention.
The current study aims at investigating the role of functional polymorphisms in the 5'UTR (c.-52G&gt;A, c.-44G&gt;C and c.-20G&gt;A) of DEFB1 gene, encoding for the antimicrobial peptide human beta-defensin 1, in the predisposition to recurrent tonsillitis in children from North Eastern Italy.
No significant correlation was found between DEFB1 allele, genotype and haplotype frequencies and recurrent tonsillitis susceptibility with the exception of an increased risk to disease development in patients carrying DEFB1 rare haplotypes.
Our results may suggest that DEFB1 polymorphisms alone may not influence pathology susceptibility, however they could possibly concur, together with other factors involved in the genetic control of innate immune system, in the predisposition towards recurrent tonsillitis.
The aim of this study was to investigate the association between beta defensin 1 gene single nucleotide polymorphisms and chronic tonsillitis.
In this study, we found that DEFB1 gene -20G/A, -44C/G and -52G/A single nucleotide polymorphisms were not associated with chronic tonsillitis.
Studies, which analyse other polymorphism of the beta defensin 1 gene in large case series, should be conducted to understand the role of DEFB1 gene on chronic tonsillitis.
Microarray analyses of sinus mucosa in pediatric patients with chronic rhinosinusitis (CRS) have recently demonstrated increased messenger RNA expression of the inflammatory chemokines CXCL5 and CXCL13 and of the innate immune mediators Beta-defensin 1 (DEFB1), serum amyloid A2 (SAA2), and serpin B4.
Our aim was to investigate HBD1-3 in tonsillar tissue and their potential role in allergic rhinitis (AR).
hBD-1 and hBD-2 were expressed in both normal and chronic sinusitis mucosa, but the expression levels varied significantly between the individuals.
To determine the frequency of mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome (MDS) in infants with cholestasis and liver failure and to further clarify the clinical, biochemical, radiologic, histopathologic, and molecular features associated with MDS due to deoxyguanosine kinase (DGUOK) and MPV17 gene mutations.
We identified pathogenic MPV17 and DGUOK mutations in 11 infants (6 females) representing 2.5% of the 450 cases of infantile cholestasis and 22% of the 50 cases of infantile liver failure referred to our center during the study period.
Mitochondrial DNA depletion seen in Navajo neurohepatopathy and in respiratory chain disorders of infancy was associated with cholestasis and cirrhosis in the former and microvesicular steatosis and oncocytic transformation (mitochondrial hyperplasia) in the latter.
The results revealed the panels of immunohistochemical markers for the differential diagnosis of rectal adenocarcinoma, in which [+] designates positivity in rectal adenocarcinoma and [-] designates negativity in rectal adenocarcinoma: from bladder adenocarcinoma, CDX2[+], VIL1[+], KRT7[-], THBD[-] and UPK3A[-]; from prostate adenocarcinoma, CDX2[+], VIL1[+], CEACAM5[+], KLK3(PSA)[-], ACPP(PAP)[-] and SLC45A3(prostein)[-]; and from ovarian mucinous adenocarcinoma, CEACAM5[+], VIL1[+], CDX2[+], KRT7[-] and MUC5AC[-].
Long-term survival estimated by log-rank test was negatively impacted by anemia (hemoglobin &lt;10 mg/dl), low serum albumin, emergent/urgent operation, and infective endocarditis.
Less common syndromes that are associated with ST are; Fabry Disease, Ellis-van Creveld syndrome, Nance-Horan syndrome, Rubinstein-Taybi Syndrome and Trico-Rhino-Phalangeal syndrome.
The occurrence of multiple supernumerary teeth is often found in association with syndromes such as Gardner syndrome, Anderson-Fabry disease, Ellis-van Creveld syndrome, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, incontinentia pigmenti, and Tricho-rhino-phalangeal syndrome.
Multiple hyperodontia can be associated with several syndromes such as Gardner's, cleidocranial dysplasia, tricho-rhino phalangic syndrome or in patients with cleft lip and palate.
The manifestations of branchio-oto-renal syndrome (BOR), Treacher Collins syndrome, tricho-rhino-phalangeal syndrome, van der Woude syndrome, and Langer-Giedion syndrome are well-defined; these conditions represent clinically and genetically separate syndromes.
We found that ROR1 associates with hematopoietic-lineage-cell-specific protein 1 (HS1) in freshly isolated CLL cells or in CLL cells cultured with exogenous Wnt5a.
Hematopoietic cell-specific lyn substrate 1 (HS1) is a cortactin-related and leukocyte-specific actin-binding protein (ABP) that regulates several processes in various immune cells.
From this group, we validated the HSP90 cochaperone P23 that was demonstrated to exhibit cytosolic prostaglandin E2 synthase 3 (PTGES3) activity, and the hematopoietic cell-specific LYN substrate 1 (HCLS1 or HS1), a hematopoietic cell-specific adapter molecule, as novel macrophage RBPs.
Both fascin and cortactin are known constituents but the role of fascin actin bundling is still unclear and cortactin research rather focuses on its homologue hematopoietic lineage cell-specific protein-1 (HS1).
HS-1-associated protein X-1 (HAX1) is a multi-functional protein which was first identified as a Hematopoietic cell specific Lyn Substrate 1 (HS1)-binding protein.
Proteins that drive actin polymerization such as WASp (Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein) and HS1 (hematopoietic lineage cell-specific protein 1) promote signaling through PLCGamma1 (phospholipase CGamma1) and release of Ca(2+) from endoplasmic reticulum stores.
HS1 (hematopoietic cell-specific Lyn substrate-1) is a cytoskeletal interactor in the B-cell receptor (BCR) signaling pathway whose phosphorylation correlates with prognosis in Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia (CLL).
We found that hematopoietic cell-specific Lyn substrate 1 (HCLS1 or HS1) is highly expressed in human myeloid cells and that stimulation with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) leads to HCLS1 phosphorylation.
In patients with severe congenital neutropenia, inherited mutations in the gene encoding HCLS1-associated protein X-1 (HAX1) lead to profound defects in G-CSF-triggered phosphorylation of HCLS1 and subsequently to reduced autoregulation and expression of LEF-1.
In bone marrow biopsies of the majority of tested patients with acute myeloid leukemia, HCLS1 protein expression is substantially elevated, associated with high levels of G-CSF synthesis and, in some individuals, a four-residue insertion in a proline-rich region of HCLS1 protein known to accelerate intracellular signaling.
In B-Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia (B-CLL) kinase Lyn is overexpressed, active, abnormally distributed, and part of a cytosolic complex involving hematopoietic lineage cell-specific protein 1 (HS1).
Using immunohistochemistry, MMP-9, VEGF-C and the level of lymphatic microvessel density (LMVD) were analyzed in 106 cases of breast invasive ductal carcinoma and 20 cases of breast proliferative lesions.
Key words used in the research included 'VEGF-C", "breast cancer", "immunohistochemistry", "breast neoplasma(s)", "breast carcinoma", "metastasis", and "prognosis".
Pathology revealed an invasive lobular carcinoma (2.5 x 2 mm in size) with extensive lymphatic involvement, which strongly expressed both vascular endothelial growth factor-C (VEGF-C) and VEGF-D. Riportiamo il caso di metastasi ascellare sinistra da carcinoma occulto della mammella in donna di 63 anni.
Related to these dissemination and metastatic features, we aimed to study the immunohistochemical expression of D2-40, VEGF-C and VEGFR-3 in 25 cases of ILCs stratified according to the histopathological and molecular classification.
We found hypomethylation of the CRIPTO promoter in undifferentiated fetal germ cells, embryonal carcinoma and seminomas, but hypermethylation in differentiated fetal germ cells and the differentiated types of non-seminomas.
CRIPTO protein was strongly expressed in germ cell neoplasia in situ along with embryonal carcinoma, yolk sac tumor and seminomas.
Further, cleaved CRIPTO was detected in media from seminoma and embryonal carcinoma cell lines, suggesting that cleaved CRIPTO may provide diagnostic indication of germ cell cancer.
Accordingly, CRIPTO was detectable in serum from 6/15 patients with embryonal carcinoma, 5/15 patients with seminoma, 4/5 patients with germ cell neoplasia in situ cells only and in 1/15 control patients.
In addition, knockdown of Cripto-1 expression in human and mouse embryonal carcinoma cells desensitized the ligand-induced Notch signaling activation.
In the present study, we investigated the effect of low levels of oxygen, which occurs naturally in rapidly growing tissues, on Cripto-1 expression in mouse embryonic stem (mES) cells and in human embryonal carcinoma cells.
During hypoxia, Cripto-1 expression levels were significantly elevated in mES cells and in Ntera-2 or NCCIT human embryonal carcinoma cells, as compared with cells growing with normal oxygen levels.
The typical malformative pattern of MMF embryopathy includes external ear anomalies ranging from hypoplastic pinna (microtia) to complete absence of pinna (anotia); cleft lip, with or without cleft palate, and ocular anomalies as iris or chorioretinal coloboma and anophthalmia/microphthalmia.
HOXA2 biallelic mutations were also described in an inbreed family with autosomal recessive microtia, hearing impairment and incomplete cleft palate.
We observed significant odds ratios (ORs) for isolated hydrocephaly (adjusted OR [AOR], 2.1; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.1-4.2), isolated anotia/microtia (AOR, 2.0; 95% CI, 1.0-4.0), isolated colonic atresia (crude OR, 7.5; 95% CI, 2.5-22.3), isolated omphalocele (AOR, 2.3; 95% CI, 1.1-4.6) and isolated anencephaly (crude OR, 0.23; 95% CI, 0.06-0.94).
However the prevalence of some malformations such as Down syndrome, Polydactyly, anotia-microtia, syndactyly and cleft palate have increased.
American Indians/Alaska Natives had a significantly higher and 50% or greater prevalence for 7 conditions (aPR = 3.97; 95% confidence interval [CI] = 2.89, 5.44 for anotia or microtia); aPRs of 1.5 to 2.1 for cleft lip, trisomy 18, and encephalocele, and lower, upper, and any limb deficiency).
However, trends were observed for coarctation, pyloric stenosis, and shaft or penoscrotal hypospadias in OS twins; microcephaly, anotia/microtia, conotruncal defects, membranous ventricular septal defects, pyloric stenosis, all hypospadias, and craniosynostosis in SS twins; and tetralogy of Fallot, right ventricular outflow tract obstructions, renal agenesis/hypoplasia, and craniosynostosis in all twins.
CMs most frequently found were: spina bifida, limb reduction defects, cleft lip palate, microcephaly, anotia/microtia, hypospadias, polydactyly, cleft palate, anophthalmia/ microphthalmia and omphalocele.
The patient had been treated with vitamin B12 1,000 micrograms/day injection and, in Sep. 1984, he recovered from megaloblastic anemia (Hb 13.4 g/dl, RBC 440 X 10(4)/mm3, MCV 90.7 fl, MCH 30.4 pg).
The large cluster has additionally been covered by a sequence ready PAC contig and three probably unrelated genes (TRMI2, BTN and SSADH) have been accurately localized within the 6p22.2-p22.1 region.
Twenty-two Japanese patients with glaucomatocyclitic crisis were typed for HLA-A, HLA-B, and HLA-C antigens to detect the immunogenetic factors in this disease.
Integrin Alfa3 (ITGA3) gene mutations are associated with Interstitial Lung disease, Nephrotic syndrome and Epidermolysis bullosa (ILNEB syndrome).
To date only six patients are reported: all carried homozygous ITGA3 mutations and presented a dramatically severe phenotype leading to death before age 2 years, from multi-organ failure due to interstitial lung disease and congenital nephrotic syndrome.
Interstitial lung disease, nephrotic syndrome and junctional epidermolysis bullosa is an autosomal recessive multiorgan disorder caused by mutations in the gene for the integrin Alfa3 subunit (ITGA3).
Recently, mutations in the human ITGA3 were shown to cause congenital nephrotic syndrome, epidermolysis bullosa and interstitial lung disease, otherwise termed NEP syndrome (Nephrotic syndrome, Epidermolysis bullosa and Pulmonary disease).
Here, we report on a patient homozygous for a novel missense mutation in the human ITGA3 gene, causing fatal interstitial lung disease and congenital nephrotic syndrome.
H-2a/b fetuses had a cleft palate frequency of 29%; 11% of the H-2b/b fetuses had cleft palate (P less than .01), demonstrating that the higher susceptibility to cleft palate segregates with the H-2a halotype.
The estimated mean arcsine % cleft palate at 160 mg/kg was different for each strain: B10.A-H-2a, 53.1 +/- 2.19; B10.BR-H-2k, 33.1 +/- 2.27; B10.D2-H-2d, 25.0 +/- 2.75.
The frequency of cleft palate (CP) and corticosterone levels in maternal plasma and amniotic fluid were determined in pregnant C57BL/10 (H-2b) and congenic B10.A (H-2a) mice after the ip injection of repository ACTH, corticosterone acetate, or desoxycorticosterone acetate (DOCA) on the 11th through 14th day of gestation.
In conclusion, it appears extremely useful to combine IHC analysis of SATB2 and CD99 with molecular analysis of Ewing sarcoma-associated genetic aberrations, to differentiate small cell osteosarcoma from other small round cell malignancies of bone.
The strong IHC expression of SATB2 associated with CD99 immunonegativity and the absence of EWSR1 and FUS gene rearrangements in small cell osteosarcoma argues against the existence of a morphologic/genetic continuum with Ewing sarcoma.
Reduced orexin immunoreactivity has been reported in various neurologic conditions such as narcolepsy, Alzheimer's disease, Lewy body disease and multiple system atrophy (MSA); however, there has been no report investigating orexin in Perry syndrome, a rare hereditary neurodegenerative disease characterized by four clinical cardinal signs (parkinsonism, depression/apathy, weight loss, and central hypoventilation).
We evaluated CSF hypocretin-1 levels in 15 patients with moderately severe multiple system atrophy (MSA), another synucleinopathy where sleep disorders occur frequently and EDS has been reported, performing additional electrophysiological studies in 5 of them to assess the presence of EDS and sleep onset REM (SOREM) periods.
The combined adjuvant acts via MyD88 in both bone marrow-derived and non-bone marrow-derived radioresistant cells to induce hemagglutinin-specific antibodies and protect mice against influenza virus challenge.
After acid-loading for 7 days, CD-Rhbg/Rhcg-KO mice developed significantly more severe metabolic acidosis than did C mice.
Metabolic acidosis increased phosphenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK) and Na(+)/H(+) exchanger NHE-3 and decreased glutamine synthetase (GS) expression in both genotypes, and these changes were significantly greater in CD-Rhbg/Rhcg-KO than in C mice.
We conclude that 1) Rhbg and Rhcg are critically important in the renal response to metabolic acidosis; 2) the significantly greater changes in PEPCK, NHE-3, and GS expression in acid-loaded CD-Rhbg/Rhcg-KO compared with acid-loaded C mice cause the role of Rhbg and Rhcg to be underestimated quantitatively; and 3) in mice with intact Rhbg and Rhcg expression, metabolic acidosis does not induce maximal changes in PEPCK, NHE-3, and GS expression despite the presence of persistent metabolic acidosis.
HsRhCG(R202C) may confer susceptibility to disorders leading to metabolic acidosis for instance.
The Rhesus factor protein, Rh C glycoprotein (Rhcg), is an ammonia transporter whose expression in the collecting duct is necessary for normal ammonia excretion both in basal conditions and in response to metabolic acidosis.
Lack of the renal isoform RhCG in mice causes reduced ammonium excretion and metabolic acidosis.
Deletion of RhBG in mice had no effect on renal ammonium excretion, whereas RhCG deficiency reduces renal ammonium secretion strongly, causes metabolic acidosis in acid-challenged mice, and impairs restoration of normal acid-base status.
The purpose of the current studies was to better understand the specific role of Rhcg expression in intercalated cells in basal and metabolic acidosis-stimulated renal ammonia excretion.
We conclude that 1) Rhcg expression in intercalated cells is necessary for the normal renal response to metabolic acidosis; 2) principal cell Rhcg contributes to both basal and acidosis-stimulated ammonia excretion; and 3) adaptations in Rhbg expression occur in response to acid-loading.
Early onset ataxia with ocular motor apraxia and hypoalbuminemia (EAOH)/ataxia with oculomotor apraxia 1 (AOA1) is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by mutations in the APTX gene.
Ataxia with ocular motor apraxia type 1 (AOA1) is another autosomal recessive cerebellar ataxia which is associated with oculomotor apraxia, hypoalbuminaemia, and hypercholesterolemia.
Mutations in TDP1 and APTX have been linked to Spinocerebellar ataxia with axonal neuropathy (SCAN1) and Ataxia-ocular motor apraxia 1 (AOA1), respectively, while mutations in PNKP are considered to be responsible for Microcephaly with seizures (MCSZ) and Ataxia-ocular motor apraxia 4 (AOA4).
Mutations in APTX cause an inherited human disease syndrome characterized by early-onset progressive ataxia with ocular motor apraxia (AOA1).
Ataxia oculomotor apraxia type 1 (AOA1), an autosomal recessive ataxia, results from a mutation on the aprataxin gene (APTX).
Early onset ataxia with ocular motor apraxia and hypoalbuminaemia/ataxia-oculomotor apraxia 1 is a recessively inherited ataxia caused by mutations in the aprataxin gene.
Significant attention has been given on the DNA SSB repair (SSBR) system in neurons, because the impairment of the SSBR causes human neurodegenerative disorders, including early-onset ataxia with ocular motor apraxia and hypoalbuminemia (EAOH), also known as ataxia-oculomotor apraxia Type 1 (AOA1).
EAOH/AOA1 is characterized by early-onset slowly progressive ataxia, ocular motor apraxia, peripheral neuropathy and hypoalbuminemia.
We have demonstrated by in vitro assay that aprataxin, the causative gene product for early-onset ataxia with ocular motor apraxia and hypoalbuminemia/ ataxia with oculomotor apraxia type 1 (EAOH/AOA1), specifically removes 3'-phosphoglycolate and 3'-phosphate ends at DNA 3'-ends, but not 3'-alpha, beta-unsaturated aldehyde ends.
We have demonstrated by in vitro assay that aprataxin, the causative gene product for early-onset ataxia with ocular motor apraxia and hypoalbuminemia/ataxia with oculomotor apraxia type 1 (EAOH/AOA1), specifically removes 3'-phosphoglycolate and 3'-phosphate ends at DNA 3'-ends, but not 3'-alpha, beta-unsaturated aldehyde ends.
This study was designed to evaluate the protective effects of vitamin E (VitE) and testosterone on varicocele (VCL)-induced damage in testis and sperm parameters and their effects on Hsp70-2 chaperone expression and on antioxidant status.
Previous studies have reported that oxidored-nitro domain containing protein 1 (NOR1) is a novel tumor suppressor gene identified in various types of cancer, such as nasopharyngeal carcinoma and cervical cancer.
The recombinant             expression vector pCDNA3.1-myc-his-NOR1 was constructed and transfected into human             NPC 6-10B nasopharyngeal cancer and HeLa cervical cancer (CCA) cells.
PTI-1 was detected by cotransfecting human prostate carcinoma DNA into CREF-Trans 6 cells, inducing tumors in nude mice, and isolating genes displaying increased expression in tumor-derived cells by using differential RNA display (DD).
This study demonstrates that GBMs acquire resistance to radiation via upregulation of acid ceramidase (ASAH1) and sphingosine-1-phosphate (Sph-1P).
These results suggest that ASAH1 and Sph-1P may be excellent targets for the treatment of new GBMs and recurrent GBMs, especially since the latter overexpresses ASAH1.
Real-time reverse transcriptase PCR analyses of 26 cancer-related genes revealed that seven genes (NPPB, ATF3, DDIT4, CDH10, TSPAN14, TXNIP, and AXL) were significantly upregulated and nine genes (PAGE4, LRP8, SNCAIP, IGFBP5, SLCO2A1, CLDN2, ESRRG, D2HGDH, and PDGFRA) were significantly downregulated.
We found that patients with essential thrombocythemia exhibited higher serum Sph-1-P and DHSph-1-P concentrations.
In addition, synphilin-1A blocks the ubiquitylation and degradation of the SIAH substrates synphilin-1 and deleted in colon cancer protein.
KA B. bovis parasites are currently in use as a live attenuated vaccine for bovine babesiosis in Australia.
PurposeIn 2012 we reported in six individuals a clinical condition almost indistinguishable from PLOD1-kyphoscoliotic Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (PLOD1-kEDS), caused by biallelic mutations in FKBP14, and characterized by progressive kyphoscoliosis, myopathy, and hearing loss in addition to connective tissue abnormalities such as joint hypermobility and hyperelastic skin.
Molecular analysis of the PLOD1 gene revealed that she had a novel homozygous p.Pro622Argfs*3 (c. 1863_1864dupCG) mutation in exon 17 that is expected to cause complete loss of the enzyme lysyl hydroxylase 1 and to cause kyphoscoliotic type of the Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
We describe a child with the kyphoscoliotic type of the Ehlers-Danlos syndrome with a novel mutation of the PLOD1 gene.
The absence of FKBP22 leads to a kyphoscoliotic type of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS), and this type of EDS is classified as EDS type VI, which can also be caused by a deficiency in lysyl-hydroxylase 1.
The kyphoscoliotic type of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS VIA) (OMIM 225400) is a rare inheritable connective tissue disorder characterized by a deficiency of collagen lysyl hydroxylase 1 (LH1; EC 1.14.11.4) due to mutations in PLOD1.
PLAN syndrome encompasses a group of phenotypes with a different age of onset: classic infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy (INAD), atypical neuroaxonal dystrophy of childhood-onset (atypical NAD) and adult-onset PLA2G6-related dystonia-parkinsonism (PARK14).
A recessive mutation in PLA2G6, which is known to cause infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy (INAD) and neurodegeneration associated with brain iron accumulation (NBIA), has recently been shown to be responsible for PARK14-linked dystonia-parkinsonism.
Recessively inherited mutations of the PLA2G6 gene are causative of infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy and other PLA2G6-associated neurodegeneration, which includes conditions known as atypical neuroaxonal dystrophy, Karak syndrome and early-onset dystonia-parkinsonism with cognitive impairment.
Recessive mutations in PLA2G6 have been associated with different neurodegenerative disorders, including infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy, neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation and more recently, early-onset dystonia parkinsonism.
Mutations in PLA2G6 were identified in patients with a spectrum of neurodegenerative conditions, such as infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy (INAD), atypical late-onset neuroaxonal dystrophy (ANAD) and dystonia parkinsonism complex (DPC).
Mutations in PLA2G6 are associated with a number of neurodegenerative disorders including neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (NBIA), infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy (INAD), and dystonia parkinsonism, collectively known as PLA2G6-associated neurodegeneration (PLAN).
PLA2G6-associated neurodegeneration (PLAN) is a recessive neurodegenerative disorder characterized by three distinct phenotypes: infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy (INAD), atypical neuroaxonal dystrophy (atypical NAD), and PLA2G6-related dystonia-parkinsonism.
Three patients presented with PLA2G6-associated neurodegeneration (PLAN); two had infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy (INAD) and one had adult-onset dystonia-parkinsonism.
The incidence of abdominal pain (X(2) = 6.588, P = 0.010), acute cholecystitis (X(2) = 29.176, P = 0.000), acute cholangitis (X(2) = 6.349, P = 0.012), choledocholithiasis (X(2) = 16.744, P = 0.000), carcinoembryonic antigen test (P = 0.007), CA125 (P = 0.001), and diffuse gallbladder wall thickening (X(2) = 6.031, P = 0.014), continued mucosal line (X(2) = 15.745, P = 0.000), homogeneous enhancement of mucosal line (X(2) = 19.947, P = 0.000), submucosal hypoattenuated nodules or band (X(2) = 18.607, P = 0.000) in computed tomography demonstrated statistically significant differences between cases of xanthogranulomatous cholecystitis and gallbladder cancer.
Radioimmunoassay for serum CA19-9, CA125 and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) was obtained from 86 patients with hyperbilirubinemia, including 50 patients with malignant jaundice (pancreatic carcinoma 20, biliary tract carcinoma 30) and 36 patients with benign jaundice (choledocholithiasis 33, acute cholangitis 3).
Furthermore, an increased risk of non-astrocytoma subtype associated with EGFRrs9642393, EME1rs12450550, ATMrs170548, and GLTSCRrs1035938 as well as a decreased risk of this subtype associated with XRCC4rs7721416 and XRCC4rs2662242 were detected.This study indicates SNPs in EGFR, ERCC1, CHAF1A, XRCC1, EME1, ATM, GLTSCR1, and XRCC4 may be associated with the risk of PBTs.
We observed significantly increased risk of meningioma with the T variant of GLTSCR1 rs1035938 (OR(CT/TT) = 3.5; 95% confidence interval: 1.8-6.9; P(trend) .0006), which persisted after controlling for multiple comparisons (P = .019).
However, the results might warrant clarification in additional series in conjunction with the nearby putative glioma suppressor genes (GLTSCR1 and GLTSCR2).
The authors have previously described a 150-kilobase minimal deletion region in gliomas that maps to 19q13.33 and contains 3 novel candidate genes (GLTSCR1, EHD2, and GLTSCR2).
The prevalence of a germline GLTSCR1-exon-1 T allele (SNP rs1035938) was 40% in cases with oligodendrogliomas compared with 27% in controls (P = 0.029), and the prevalence of an ERCC2-exon-22 T allele (SNP rs1052555) was 35% in cases with oligodendrogliomas compared with 18% in controls (P = 0.043).
Cases with oligodendrogliomas with the 19q deletion had a significantly higher frequency of the GLTSCR1-exon-1 T allele compared with cases without the 19q deletion (P = 0.01).
It was noteworthy that cases with gliomas who were homozygous for the GLTSCR1-exon-1 T allele had a significantly better survival: 77% and 68% survival at 2 and 5 years compared with 56% and 34% for other genotypes (P = 0.02, log-rank test).
These results suggested that alterations in GLTSCR1 (or a closely linked gene) were associated with the development and progression of oligodendroglioma.
These data suggest that PDLSCs promote osteoclast differentiation via Runx2 upregulating RANKL and downregulating OPG, leading to enhanced root resorption that results in physiological exfoliation of primary teeth.
E-selectin overexpression in association with BRAF mutation status could promote a more aggressive phenotype in papillary thyroid carcinoma.
Se le ha relacionado principalmente con aneurismas y otros padecimientos, pero no con paraganglioma.
Se le coloco un marcapasos temporal en el preoperatorio y despues de la reseccion del paraganglioma carotideo, de acuerdo con los estudios de electrofisiologia cardiaca, se le dio de alta de manera definitiva, sin necesidad de emplear electroestimulacion definitiva.
We             investigated the liver colonization of pancreatic cancer cells under hepatic ischemia-reperfusion             and examined the involvement of E-selectin and its ligands.
Hepatic ischemia-reperfusion increases             liver metastases and E-selectin expression in pancreatic cancer.
To evaluate the possibility that L. donovani utilize LFA-3 mediated evasion pathway in human visceral leishmaniasis; in vitro experiments were performed for measurement of pathogenic cytokine IL-10 and Foxp3 mRNA expression.
This study recommends further investigations to strengthen the pathogenic and prognostic significance of LFA-3 in visceral leishmaniasis.
The expression products of Mr 69,000 GST-4BX/CD58 and Mr 41,000 GST-4BX were present mainly in the form of inclusion bodies and soluble substance respectively, and both were recognized by sera of cysticercosis patients.
25 children at risk of developing dyslexia were trained with Hoeren, Lauschen, Lernen 1 und 2 (Kuspert &amp; Schneider, 2008; Plume &amp; Schneider, 2004) by their kindergarten teachers and were compared with 60 untrained at-risk children.
Using Sprague-Dawley rats and rat renal proximal tubular cells (NRK52E), we determined the potential involvement of Fgf10, Fgfr2 and AR in DBP-induced renal fibrosis.
Our findings suggest the potential involvement of Fgf10/Fgfr2 and AR in renal fibrosis of adult male rat offspring induced by prenatal exposure to DBP.
MTLE hippocampi of subjects without psychiatric history, MTLE + major depression, MTLE + interictal psychosis derived from epilepsy surgery, and control necropsies were investigated for p75(NTR), TrkB, TrkA, and TrkC immunohistochemistry.
Tyrosine kinase receptors TrkB and TrkC mediate neuroprotective effects of the brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and neurotrophins in the dopaminergic nigro-striatal system, but it is obscure about their responses or expression changes in the injured substantia nigra under Parkinson's disease.
ROS1 is a receptor tyrosine kinase that has recently been shown to undergo gene rearrangements in~1%-2% of non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) and in a variety of other tumours including cholangiocarcinoma, gastric carcinoma, colorectal carcinoma and in spitzoid neoplasms, glioblastoma and inflammatory myofibroblastic tumours.
Moreover, several of the ROS1 fusion proteins are implicated in the pathogenesis of a very small proportion of other cancers including glioblastoma, angiosarcoma, and cholangiocarcinoma as well as ovarian, gastric, and colorectal carcinomas.
The aim of this study was to determine frequency and clinicopathological features associated with ROS1 rearrangement in patients with cholangiocarcinoma (CCA).
We investigated the clinical and pathological significance of ROS1 expression in intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma.
ROS1 protein expression was significantly correlated with well differentiated tumors, papillary or mucinous histology, oncocytic/hepatoid or intestinal type tumors, and periductal infiltrating or intraductal growing tumors (vs. mass-forming cholangiocarcinoma).
ROS1 protein expression was associated with well-differentiated histology and better survival in our patients with resected intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma.
On the basis of our experience with performing AMP on 986 clinical FFPE samples, we show its potential as both a robust clinical assay and a powerful discovery tool, which we used to identify new therapeutically important gene fusions: ARHGEF2-NTRK1 and CHTOP-NTRK1 in glioblastoma, MSN-ROS1, TRIM4-BRAF, VAMP2-NRG1, TPM3-NTRK1 and RUFY2-RET in lung cancer, FGFR2-CREB5 in cholangiocarcinoma and PPL-NTRK1 in thyroid carcinoma.
We developed a new, quick, specific, and sensitive PCR test to screen for the FIG-ROS1 fusion and applied it to a series of Italian patients with bile duct carcinoma (BTC).
We found that six out of 65 (9%) BTC patients were positive for the FIG-ROS1 fusion, comprising two out of 14 (14%) gallbladder carcinoma (GBC) patients and four out of 25 (16%) extrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (ECC) patients.
None of the 26 intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma cases harbored the FIG-ROS1 fusion.
Recently inhibition of ROS1 kinase has proven to be a promising strategy for several indications such as glioblastoma, non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), and cholangiocarcinoma.
Thrombospondin-1 was an independent predictive factor for all endpoints and plasma thrombospondin-1 concentrations were highly associated with injury severity reflected by hematoma volume and National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale score.
Under receiver operating characteristic curves, plasma thrombospondin-1 concentrations had similar predictive values compared with hematoma volume and National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale score.
The current study was designed to investigate the change of plasma thrombospondin-1 concentrations and assess the prognostic value of plasma thrombospondin-1 concentrations for long-term mortality and functional outcome of ischemic stroke patients.
Plasma thrombospondin-1 concentrations are elevated obviously and are highly associated with long-term outcome of ischemic stroke.
These results demonstrate that miR-487b regulates angiogenesis by directly targeting THBS1 in HUVECs, indicating that miR-487b may contribute to angiogenesis and the functional recovery from ischemic stroke.
Compared with those without left ventricular hypertrophy (n=51) and left ventricular hypertrophy without ECG strain (n=30), patients with ECG strain (n=21) had more severe aortic stenosis, increased left ventricular mass index, more myocardial injury (high-sensitivity plasma cardiac troponin I concentration, 4.3 ng/L [interquartile range, 2.5-7.3 ng/L] versus 7.3 ng/L [interquartile range, 3.2-20.8 ng/L] versus 18.6 ng/L [interquartile range, 9.0-45.2 ng/L], respectively; P&lt;0.001) and increased diffuse fibrosis (extracellular volume fraction, 27.4+/-2.2% versus 27.2+/-2.9% versus 30.9+/-1.9%, respectively; P&lt;0.001).
Cardiac troponin I and T provide may provide clinically useful prognostic information both concerning the future risk of developing heart failure in asymptomatic subjects and the risk of fatal events and hospital admissions in those with already established heart failure This review summarizes current literature on the clinical performance and utility of cardiac troponin measurements as diagnostic and prognostic tools in patients with symptomatic heart failure, as well as in those with asymptomatic left ventricular dysfunction, and clinical phenotypes at high risk for developing heart failure, including stable coronary artery disease, left ventricular hypertrophy, and aortic stenosis.
High-sensitivity cardiac troponin I (cTnI) assays hold promise in detecting the transition from hypertrophy to heart failure in aortic stenosis.
We sought to investigate the mechanism for troponin release in patients with aortic stenosis and whether plasma cTnI concentrations are associated with long-term outcome.
The indexed LV mass and measures of replacement fibrosis (late gadolinium enhancement) were associated with cTnI concentrations independent of age, sex, coronary artery disease, aortic stenosis severity, and diastolic function.
Plasma cTnI concentrations were associated with AVR or cardiovascular death HR 1.77 (95% CI, 1.22 to 2.55) independent of age, sex, systolic ejection fraction, and aortic stenosis severity.
In patients with aortic stenosis, plasma cTnI concentration is associated with advanced hypertrophy and replacement myocardial fibrosis as well as AVR or cardiovascular death.
Cardiac samples from 43 sarcomere mutation-positive patients (HCMmut: mutations in thick (MYBPC3, MYH7) and thin (TPM1, TNNI3, TNNT2) myofilament genes) were compared with 14 sarcomere mutation-negative patients (HCMsmn), eight patients with secondary LV hypertrophy due to aortic stenosis (LVHao) and 13 donors.
We discover three additional pathways viz., Glycerophospholipid metablism, h-Efp pathway and CARM1 and Regulation of Estrogen Receptor, which can be related to the metastasis phase of breast cancer.
Not only are the expression levels of CARM1 and MED12 positively correlated, but their high expression also predicts better prognosis in human breast cancers after chemotherapy.
To investigate the functional roles and the prognosis potential of CARM1 alternative spliced isoforms in breast cancer, we used recently developed antibodies to detect differential CARM1 isoform expression in subcellular compartments and among malignant and benign breast tumors.
Furthermore neither CARM1FL nor CARM1DeltaE15 expression correlated with breast cancer molecular subtypes, tumor size, or lymph node involvement.
This study also demonstrates no obvious association of CARM1 isoform expression and clinical correlates in breast cancer.
Recent studies, however, have shown that CARM1 expression correlates with poor prognosis, indicating a need for further studies of both CARM1 isoforms in a large cohort of breast cancer specimens.
Coactivator-associated arginine methyltransferase 1 (CARM1), a coactivator for various cancer-relevant transcription factors, is overexpressed in breast cancer.
To elucidate the functions of CARM1 in tumorigenesis, we knocked out CARM1 from several breast cancer cell lines using Zinc-Finger Nuclease technology, which resulted in drastic phenotypic and biochemical changes.
CARM1 has been reported to be associated with high grade tumors in breast cancer.
It still remains unknown the expression pattern of CARM1 in breast cancer and its relationships with clinicopathological characteristics and molecular subtypes.
CARM1 expression was increased in invasive breast cancer.
Our results support the value of using CARM1 in prognostic stratification of breast cancer patients and its potential therapeutic implications in targeting treatment.
It plays an important role in breast cancer growth by regulating the E2F1 expression suggesting that CARM1 could be a target in the subclassification of oestrogen-dependent breast cancer.
This study aims to investigate the clinical and biological importance of CARM1 protein expression in a large (1,130 patients), well-characterised and annotated series of invasive breast cancers using tissue microarrays and immunohistochemistry.
Outcome analyses indicate that CARM1 expression is an independent predictor of shorter breast cancer-specific survival and disease-free interval in the whole series and in the ER-positive subgroup.
CARM1 shows an oncogenic effect in breast cancer and its expression is associated with poor prognosis.
We investigated CARM1 levels and localization across breast cancer tumors in a cohort of patients of either European or African ancestry.
Although it is known to be an ER cofactor in breast cancer, CARM1 expression levels are independent of ER.
Mutations in the genes ENG, ACVRL1 and SMAD4 that are part of the transforming growth factor-beta signalling pathway cause hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT).
However, the genetic effects of SMAD4 in the pathogenesis of thoracic aortic aneurysm and dissection (TAAD) are still largely unknown.
However, the exact role of Smad4 in smooth muscle cells (SMCs) leading to the pathogenesis of aortic aneurysms is largely unknown.
To determine the role of smooth muscle Smad4 in the pathogenesis of aortic aneurysms.
Conditional gene knockout strategy combined with histology and expression analysis showed that Smad4 or TGF-Beta receptor type II deficiency in SMCs led to the occurrence of aortic aneurysms along with an upregulation of cathepsin S and matrix metallopeptidase-12, which are proteases essential for elastin degradation.
Monocyte/macrophage depletion or blocking selective chemokine axis largely abrogated the progression of aortic aneurysm caused by Smad4 deficiency in SMCs.
The findings reveal that Smad4-dependent TGF-Beta signaling in SMCs protects against aortic aneurysm formation and dissection.
Patients with a SMAD4 mutation should be followed up both for JPS and haemorrhagic hereditary telangiectasia and may develop protein loosing enteropathy and immunodeficiency.
These changes may participate in pathophysiology of cardiac dysfunction in renovascular hypertension that is associated with subnormal level of serum apelin.
The aim of this study was to analyze the interaction of apelin and the opioid system with respect to vascular responses to apelin in rats with renovascular hypertension (two-kidney, one clip (2K1C)).
Down regulation of apelin receptor in nonischemic kidney of hypertensive rats may play a role in pathophysiology of renovascular hypertension.
The data obtained with four independently derived transgenic embryos and with one transgenic line demonstrate that deregulated Pax-2 expression results in histologically abnormal and dysfunctional renal epithelium with properties similar to congenital nephrotic syndrome.
In a recent report, deregulation of expression of the gene coding for the Pax-2 DNA-binding protein was shown to generate severe kidney abnormalities in transgenic mice resembling the clinical and pathological findings in congenital nephrotic syndrome, making it a candidate gene for CNF.
However, in this study, we have unequivocally excluded the Pax-2 gene locus as a causative for congenital nephrotic syndrome of the Finnish type.
Evaluation of 29 SNPs (P &lt; 1 x 10(-5)) in an additional 971 severely obese children and 1,990 controls identified 4 new loci associated with severe obesity (LEPR, PRKCH, PACS1 and RMST).
Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia tarda (SEDT) is an X-linked recessive osteochondrodysplasia characterized by disproportionately short stature and degenerative joint disease.
Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia tarda (SEDT) is a genetically heterogeneous disorder often associated with the early onset of osteoarthrosis.
SEDT should be kept in mind as a differential diagnosis in men with early "primary" bilateral osteoarthrosis.
Until now, four disease genes for Warburg micro syndrome, RAB3GAP1, RAB3GAP2, RAB18 and TBC1D20, have been identified.
RAB18, RAB3GAP1, RAB3GAP2 and TBC1D20 are each mutated in Warburg Micro syndrome, a rare autosomal recessive multisystem disorder.
In addition to TBC1D20, mutations in RAB3GAP1, RAB3GAP2 and RAB18 cause WARBM1-3 respectively.
WARBM1-4 can be caused by biallelic mutations of the RAB3GAP1 (RAB3 GTPase-activating protein 1), RAB3GAP2, RAB18 (RAS-associated protein RAB18), or TBC1D20 (TBC1 domain protein, member 20) gene, respectively.
Based on the function of TBC1D20 as a RABGAP and the bs cataract and testicular phenotypes, we hypothesized that mutations in TBC1D20 may contribute to Warburg micro syndrome (WARBM); WARBM constitutes a spectrum of disorders characterized by eye, brain, and endocrine abnormalities caused by mutations in RAB3GAP1, RAB3GAP2, and RAB18.
Micro syndrome has been associated with causative mutations in three disease genes: RAB3GAP1, RAB3GAP2 and RAB18.
While biallelic loss-of-function mutations in RAB3GAP1 are present in the majority of patients with Warburg Micro syndrome; a hypomorphic homozygous splicing mutation of RAB3GAP2 has been reported in a single family with Martsolf syndrome.
Here, we report a novel homozygous RAB3GAP2 small in-frame deletion, c.499_507delTTCTACACT (p.Phe167_Thr169del) that causes Warburg Micro syndrome in a girl from a consanguineous Turkish family presenting with congenital cataracts, microphthalmia, absent visually evoked potentials, microcephaly, polymicrogyria, hypoplasia of the corpus callosum, and severe developmental delay.
No RAB3GAP2 mutations were detected in ten additional unrelated patients with RAB3GAP1-negative Warburg Micro syndrome, consistent with further genetic heterogeneity.
Rather, our findings suggest that loss-of-function mutations of RAB3GAP1 as well as functionally severe RAB3GAP2 mutations cause Warburg Micro syndrome while hypomorphic RAB3GAP2 mutations can result in the milder Martsolf phenotype.
Studying a panel of human B-cell lines derived from patients with Burkitt's lymphoma (BL) and AIDS-associated Burkitt's lymphoma (AIDS-BL) we had described constitutive expression and secretion of large amounts of Interleukin-16 (IL-16), Macrophage Inflammatory Protein-1alpha (MIP-1alpha), Macrophage Inflammatory Protein-1beta (MIP-1beta), Interleukin-12 (IL-12), Interleukin-10 (IL-10), and Interleukin-7 (IL-7).
In Northern blot analysis we detected 2.4 kb IL-7 mRNA and by quantitative PCR we demonstrated IL-7 expression in 5 of 6 B CLS derived from patients with AIDS-associated Burkitt's lymphoma (AABCL), 3 of 3 CLS derived from patients with American Burkitt's lymphoma and 5 of 6 normal lymphoblastoid CLS.
Only 1 of 5 African Burkitt's lymphoma CLS and 2 of 7 EBV- CLS expressed IL-7.
Overall, our study provides the first evidence that CAC1, associated with LSD1, functions as an ERAlfa corepressor, implicating a potential antitumor target in ERAlfa-positive breast cancer.
Patients with a larger or complete cleft of the secondary hard palate (HSCP) and patients with unilateral (UCLP) or bilateral (BCLP) cleft lip and palate undergo two surgical stages for palate closure: a supra-periosteal retropositioning is performed around 12 months of age, and a modified Langenbeck closure of the hard palate around 60 months of age.
The all-cleft group consisted of 25 patients with hard palate cleft comprising 15 patients with unilateral cleft palate and lip (UCLP); 2 with CP but no cleft lip (UCLP subgroup) and 8 patients with bilateral cleft lip and palate (BCLP subgroup).
We evaluated with a certain assessment protocol hearing and speech abilities of 42 patients between 5 and 15 years of age: 9 with CP (cleft of the soft and hard palate), 19 with unilateral cleft lip and palate (UCLP), 14 with bilateral cleft lip and palate (BCLP), surgically treated by a team of surgeons using two different surgical techniques between 18 and 24 months of age.
Haplotypes generated with intragenic SNPs indicated the C-C-G-G-T-A to be a risk haplotype associated with CYP1B1 mutations in POAG (P = 0.006) and PACG (P = 0.043), similar to that observed in cases of primary congenital glaucoma worldwide.
To compare pepsin, carbonic anhydrase III (CAIII), cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) and mucin 5AC (MUC5AC) expression in children with adenoid hypertrophy and normal controls.
Immunodeficient Rag2(-/-)Gammac(-/-) mice, bearing various human multiple myeloma tumors, were treated with human peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMC) alone or together with autologous ex vivo cultured Tregs.
In macrophage-depleted Rag2(-/-)Gammac(-/-) mice, which were also devoid of T, B, and natural killer cells, mHag-specific native T cells or tetanus toxoid (TT)-specific T cells transduced with the mHag-specific T-cell receptor (TCR) were injected to treat full-blown mHag(+) human multiple myeloma tumors.
Here we have explored the feasibility of establishing such a model in immunodeficient RAG2(-/-)gammac(-/-) mice, by utilizing non-invasive bioluminescent imaging for real-time monitoring of multiple myeloma cell growth.
Seven multiple myeloma cell lines, marked with a green fluorescent protein firefly luciferase fusion gene, were intravenously injected into RAG2(-/-)gammac(-/-) mice.
Obesity stimulates cancer progression through chronic, low-grade inflammation in white adipose tissue, leading to accumulation of adipose tissue macrophages (ATMs), in particular, the pro-inflammatory M1 phenotype macrophage.
Alternative activation (M2) of adipose tissue resident macrophage (ATM) inhibits obesity-induced metabolic inflammation.
Visceral white adipose tissue (WAT) has been closely associated with obesity-induced inflammation and adipose tissue macrophages (ATMs) are responsible for obesity-induced inflammation by releasing inflammatory cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor-Alfa (TNF-Alfa) and interleukin-6.
During obesity, adipose tissue macrophages (ATMs) adopt a metabolically activated (MMe) phenotype.
The quantity and activation state of adipose tissue macrophages (ATMs) impact the development of obesity-induced metabolic diseases.
Appetite-controlling hormones play key roles in obesity; however, our understanding of their effects on ATMs is limited.
Therefore, ATM activation is a therapeutic target for IR in obesity.
The function of RUNDC3B has yet to be determined, although its dysregulated expression has been associated with malignant potential of both breast and lung carcinoma.
We developed sensitive methods for detecting and quantifying RPIP9 mRNA and used it to identify these transcripts in normal human tissues, 60 biopsies of primary breast carcinoma, in isolated epithelial cells both from the primary tumor and from associated lymph nodes, and from bone marrow biopsies of 74 breast cancer patients.
Tumorigenic breast carcinoma cell lines expressed RPIP9, whereas MCF-10A and HBL-100 that do not form tumors in nude mice had undetectable levels of RPIP9 mRNA.
RPIP9 was activated in a high proportion of breast carcinomas (61.6%; n = 60) and a significant correlation with metastatic lymph node invasion (N = 0-3 vs. N &gt; 3, where N = number of lymph nodes invaded; p = 0.031) was found.
In this study, we provide genetic and pharmacological evidence that inhibiting the N-myristoyltransferase NMT1 suppresses cell cycle progression, proliferation and malignant growth of prostate cancer cells.
The feature selection procedure extracted several cancer-related and lymph node metastasis-related genes, such as TP73, PDX1, FUT8, HOXD1, NMT1, and SEMA3E.
This study examined recombinant wild-type human phosphoribosylpyrophosphate synthetase 1 (wt-PRS1, EC 2.7.6.1) and the point mutant Asn114Ser PRS1 (N114S-Mutant) in cells of a patient with primary gout.
The enzymic activities of erythrocyte phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate synthetase (EC 2.7.6.1) and glutathione reductase (EC 1.6.4.2) have been measured in 54 primary gout patients, 35 individuals having hyperuricaemia and 51 healthy controls.
Among affected members of a family (B. family) with excessive purine production and gout, activity of phosphoribosylpyrophosphate synthetase (EC 2.7.6.1) is 2.5- to 3.0-fold higher than among normal people.
Clinical manifestations of PP-Rib-P synthetase superactivity are mainly limited to gout in early adulthood.
We herein document the association of PP-Rib-P synthetase superactivity, gout with excessive uric acid synthesis, and sensorineural deafness in an additional family.
The management of acute aortic aneurysm rupture or dissection (AARD) requires specific medical expertise, diagnostic techniques, and therapeutic options, not always available in all hospitals through the entire week.
The aim of this study was to investigate single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the adenosine deaminase, RNA-specific, B1 (ADARB1) and adenosine deaminase, RNA specific, B2 (ADARB2) genes in an Australian case-control Caucasian population for association with migraine.
SNPs in the ADARB2 gene were previously found to be positively associated with migraine in a pedigree-based genome wide association study using the genetic isolate of Norfolk Island, Australia.
Chi-square analysis found no significant association between any of the SNPs tested in the ADARB1 and ADARB2 genes in this study and the occurrence of migraine.
In contrast to findings that SNPs in the ADARB2 gene were positively associated with migraine in the Norfolk Island population, we find no evidence to support the involvement of RNA editing genes in migraine susceptibility in an Australian Caucasian population.
We show here that the drebrin/EB3 pathway, which co-ordinates dynamic microtubule/actin filament interactions underlying cell shape changes in response to guidance cues, plays a role in prostate cancer cell invasion.
Disruption of the drebrin/EB3 pathway using BTP2, a small molecule inhibitor of drebrin binding to actin filaments, reduced the invasion of prostate cancer cell lines in 3D in vitro assays.
Furthermore, gain- or loss-of-function of drebrin or EB3 by over-expression or siRNA-mediated knockdown increases or decreases invasion of prostate cancer cell lines in 3D in vitro assays, respectively.
Finally, expression of a dominant-negative construct that competes with EB3 binding to drebrin, also inhibited invasion of prostate cancer cell lines in 3D in vitro assays.
Our findings show that co-ordination of dynamic microtubules and actin filaments by the drebrin/EB3 pathway drives prostate cancer cell invasion and is therefore implicated in disease progression.
The colonic adenocarcinoma cell line LS180, its more motile sublines (EB3, 3LNLN, 5W) and Beta-catenin-knockdown LS180 cells were used to investigate the expression levels and subcellular localization of Beta-catenin and gelsolin.
IL-10, IL-12 and IL-17F as inflammatory cytokines might be an important functional candidate genes for autoimmune diseases including MCTD.
The frequency of the IL-10-592A and -1082A allele was higher in MCTD patients than in control groups (both p = 0,0000).
Present findings indicate that IL-10 gene variants may be considered as genetic risk factors for MCTD susceptibility.
There was an increase in the percentage and absolute number of CD4+IL-10+ Treg cells in patients with MCTD compared to the healthy controls (p&lt;0.02).
The percentage of CD4+IL-10+ Treg cells was higher in the active stage of MCTD than in the inactive stage of the disease (p&lt;0.005).
However, we did not find any significant difference in the absolute number of CD4+IL-10+ Treg cells between the patients in the active and inactive stages of MCTD.
We suggest that the increase in the number of CD4+IL-10+ Treg cells is a compensatory mechanism aiming to restore the balance between type 1 and type 2 cytokines in MCTD.
Again, CD4+ and CD8+ T cells from patients with active MCTD produced significantly more IL-10 than cells in patients with inactive disease or in controls (p &lt; 0.05).
Our results suggest that MCTD is associated with increased production of both type 1 (IFN-gamma) and type 2 cytokines (IL-4, IL-10).
Patients with active disease have more IL-4-expressing Tc2 cells and IL-10-expressing Th2 and Tc2 cells than patients with inactive MCTD or controls.
In MCTD, increased IL-10 production by Th2 and Tc2 cells may be an attempt by the immune system to downregulate the inflammatory reaction, although this effect may not be sufficient to restore the physiological Th1/Th2 balance in MCTD.
To investigate the levels and relationship between IL-10, TNF-alpha, anti-U1snRNP antibodies and disease activity in longitudinally collected serum samples from patients with mixed connective tissue disease (MCTD).
Increased and fluctuating levels of IL-10 or TNF-alpha without correlation to disease activity were observed in MCTD patients.
The MCTD patients had the highest serum levels of IL-10, but also had elevated IFN-gamma and TNF-alpha levels similar to the RA patients.
Although the EZH2 expression in OSCC is highly correlated with tumorigenesis, it has not been determined if specific EZH2 genetic variants are associated with OSCC risk.
The aim of this study was to investigate the relationship between genetic polymorphisms of EZH2 and susceptibility to OSCC in Taiwan.
After adjusting for other co-variants, we found that carrying CC genotype at EZH2 rs6950683 and rs3757441 had a lower risk of developing OSCC than did wild-type carriers.
The CCCA or CCTA haplotype among the four EZH2 sites was also associated with a reduced risk of OSCC.
Furthermore, OSCC patients who carried CC genotype at EZH2 rs6950683 had a higher methylation than TC genotype.
Our results suggest that the two SNPs of EZH2 (rs6950683 and rs3757441) might contribute to the prediction of OSCC susceptibility.
This is the first study to provide insight into risk factors associated with EZH2 variants and epigenetic changes in carcinogenesis of OSCC in Taiwan.
We found that DZNep reduced the cellular levels of polycomb group proteins (EZH2, SUZ12, BMI1, and RING1A) and the associated trimethylation of Lys27 on histone H3 and monoubiquitination of Lys119 on histone H2A in the poorly differentiated OSCC cell line SAS.
Furthermore, significant negative correlation between HOTAIR levels and E-cadherin levels was found in OSCC tissues and cell lines, and HOTAIR contributed to the regulation of E-cadherin through binding to EZH2 and H3K27me3 with the E-cadherin promoter.
Although the polycomb group protein enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) plays a crucial role in cell proliferation and differentiation during the occurrence and development progress of several kinds of malignant tumors, the impact of EZH2 on the development and progression of OSCC is unclear.
In this study, we demonstrate that EZH2 is overexpressed in OSCC cells and clinical tissue.
With in vitro RNAi analysis, we generated stable EZH2 knocking down cell lines from two OSCC cell lines, with two sh-RNAs targeting to EZH2, respectively.
We found that knocking down of EZH2 could decrease the proliferation ability and induce apoptosis of OSCC cells.
Moreover, we demonstrated that of EZH2 inhibition decreased the migration and metastasis of OSCC cells.
In conclusion, the results of the current study demonstrated an association between EZH2 expression and OSCC cell development.
We recommend that EZH2 acts as an oncogene and plays an important role in OSCC carcinogenesis.
Here, we examined the relationship between P53 and EZH2 in oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC).
Using immunohistochemistry, we investigated the expression of EZH2 and BMI1 in 99 surgically-resected OSCC and 34 epithelial dysplasia samples.
EZH2 and BMI1 protein were up-regulated in OSCC tissues compared with epithelial dysplasia and normal epithelium.
Aberrant EZH2 and BMI1 protein expression was observed in 32 and 59 of the 99 OSCC samples, respectively.
Aberrant EZH2 expression was associated with P53 alteration in OSCC tissue.
P53 alteration may be involved in dysregulated EZH2 expression, and aberrant expression of EZH2 may play a role in carcinogenesis of OSCC.
Our result suggests that overexpressions of histone modification-related proteins-ARK2, G9a, EZH2, and SUV39H1 but not SUV39H2 are associated with prognosis of OSCC in the male population of Taiwan.
To assess OSCC risk of OLs, we investigated the role of the transcriptional repressor enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) in oral tumorigenesis and its clinical implication as an OSCC risk predictor.
Immunohistochemistry was used to measure EZH2 expression in OLs from 76 patients, including 37 who later developed OSCC and 39 who did not.
The higher EZH2 levels were strongly associated with dysplasia (P &lt; 0.001) and OSCC development (P &lt; 0.0001).
Multivariate analysis indicated that EZH2 expression was the only independent factor for OSCC development (P &lt; 0.0001).
At 5 years after diagnosis, 80% of patients whose OLs expressed strong EZH2 developed OSCC whereas only 24% patients with moderate and none with weak/no EZH2 expression did so (P &lt; 0.0001).
Our data suggest that EZH2 plays an important role in OL malignant transformation and may be a biomarker in predicting OSCC development in patients with OLs.
The aim of the present study was to evaluate the expression of EZH2 protein in human oral normal mucosa, dysplasia and oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) with clinicopathological profiles.
EZH2 expression was assessed by Western blotting and immunohistochemistry in 3 OSCC cell lines, 10 normal mucosae, 50 dysplasias and 102 OSCCs.
Western blot analysis detected EZH2 protein as a single band at 91kDa in the 3 OSCC cell lines, but it was almost absent in non-tumoral oral mucosae.
The LI of EZH2 was highest in the OSCCs, followed by the dysplasias (p&lt;0.05) and normal mucosae (p&lt;0.05) with significant difference.
The LI of EZH2 correlated with the clinical stage, tumor size, lymph node metastasis and LIs of Ki-67 and P53, but not with the AI in OSCCs, and inversely correlated with the histological differentiation of OSCCs.
The survival rate calculated by the Kaplan-Meier method revealed that OSCC patients with higher EZH2 expression showed poorer prognosis than those with a lower EZH2 expression (p&lt;0.01).
These results suggest that overexpression of EZH2 is correlated with malignant potential and poor prognosis in OSCCs.
EZH2 might serve as a novel biomarker for predicting prognosis in patients with OSCCs.
We therefore examined the association between 14-3-3Sigma expression determined by immunohistochemistry and clinical outcomes of 51 patients with UPSC.
UPSC was considered positive for 14-3-3Sigma when &gt; 30% of tumor cells were stained with a specific antibody.
These CpG islands were hypermethylated in 30% of 14-3-3Sigma-positive UPSC and 80% of 14-3-3Sigma-negative UPSC, although the difference was not statistically significant.
These findings suggest that decreased expression of immunoreactive 14-3-3Sigma may be a predictor of poor prognosis in patients with UPSC.
Aberrant fusion proteins involving the MLL histone methyltransferase (HMT) lead to recruitment of DOT1L, to a multi-protein complex resulting in aberrant methylation of histone H3 lysine 79 at MLL target genes, and ultimately enhanced expression of critical genes for hematopoietic differentiation, including HOXA9 and MEIS1, and as such defines the established mechanism for leukemogenesis in MLL-rearrangement (MLL-r) leukemias.
Pinometostat is a first-in-class, small molecule inhibitor of DOT1L with sub-nanomolar affinity and &gt;37,000 fold selectivity against non-MLL HMTs, and was the first member of the novel HMT inhibitor class to enter Phase 1 clinical trials in both adult and pediatric MLL-r leukemia patients.
This study aimed to analyze the use of the revised International Prognostic Scoring System (IPSS-R) assessed after hypomethylating treatment (HMT) for patients with myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) undergoing an allogeneic stem cell transplantation (SCT).
Mitochondrial (mt) DNA-associated NARP (neurogenic muscle weakness, ataxia, and retinitis pigmentosa) syndrome is due to mutation in the MT-ATP6 gene.
Pathogenic mutations in MT-ATP6 are associated with the Leigh syndrome, the syndrome of neuropathy, ataxia, and retinitis pigmentosa (NARP), as well as with non-classical phenotypes, while MT-ATP8 is less frequently mutated in patients with mitochondrial disease.
Neurogenic muscle weakness, ataxia, and retinitis pigmentosa (NARP) is caused by m.8993T&gt;G/C mutations in the mitochondrial adenosine triphosphate synthase subunit 6 gene (MT-ATP6).
One member of a pedigree with NARP syndrome (neurogenic weakness, ataxia, and retinitis pigmentosa), a mitochondrial disorder due to a point mutation at position 8993 in the mitochondrial genome ATPase 6 gene, was reevaluated some 20 years after first being reported in the medical literature.
Mutations in the human mitochondrial ATP6 gene encoding ATP synthase subunit a/6 (referred to as Atp6p in yeast) are at the base of neurodegenerative disorders like Neurogenic Ataxia and Retinitis Pigmentosa (NARP), Leigh syndrome (LS), Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT), and ataxia telangiectasia.
Mutations in the ATP6 gene are reported to be associated with Leber hereditary optic neuropathy, bilateral striatal necrosis, coronary atherosclerosis risk and neuropathy, ataxia and retinitis pigmentosa (NARP)/maternally inherited Leigh syndromes.
The fusion inhibition observed upon deletion of OXPHOS related genes or upon removal of the entire mtDNA was similar to that observed upon introduction of point mutations in the mitochondrial ATP6 gene that are associated to neurogenic ataxia and retinitis pigmentosa (NARP) or to maternally inherited Leigh Syndrome (MILS) in humans.
We hypothesized that Nrf2 modulates progression from acute tubular damage to renal fibrosis.
We asked whether Nrf2 deletion increases renal injury in mice following unilateral ureteral obstruction (UUO).
We studied Nrf2 in renal biopsies of patients with acute, subacute and chronic tubulointerstitial nephritis (TIN).
The aim of this study was to evaluate the effects of resistance exercise programs on the expression of transcription factors Nrf2 and nuclear factor KB (NF-KB) in CKD patients on hemodialysis (HD).
In conclusion, these data suggest that resistance exercises seem to be capable of inducing Nrf2 activation in CKD patients on HD.
Activate Nrf2 could inhibit the activation of NLRP3 inflammasome in acute liver injury and severe lupus nephritis.
Here, we show that the loss of Nrf2 suppresses fibrosis and inflammation in a unilateral ureter obstruction (UUO) model of CKD in mice.
These results demonstrate that Nrf2-related inflammasome activation can promote CKD symptoms via infiltration of M1 macrophages.
Thus, we have identified the Nrf2 pathway as a promising therapeutic target for CKD.
Reduced nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (NRF2) pathway activity was reported in models of chronic kidney disease (CKD).
Mechanistically, AR signaling promoted glutamine metabolism by increasing the expression of the glutamine transporters SLC1A4 and SLC1A5, genes commonly overexpressed in prostate cancer.
Interestingly, MYC, a canonical oncogene in prostate cancer and previously described master regulator of glutamine metabolism, was only a context-dependent regulator of SLC1A4 and SLC1A5 levels, being unable to regulate either transporter in PTEN wild-type cells.
In contrast, rapamycin was able to decrease the androgen-mediated expression of SLC1A4 and SLC1A5 independent of PTEN status, indicating that mTOR complex 1 (mTORC1) was needed for maximal AR-mediated glutamine uptake and prostate cancer cell growth.
SLC1A4 deficiency is a recently described neurodevelopmental disorder associated with microcephaly, global developmental delay, abnormal myelination, thin corpus callosum and seizures.
Investigation for SLC1A4 deficiency should be performed regardless of ethnicity and extend to include unexplained early-onset epileptic encephalopathy.
Skeletal muscle of dystrophin-null mice, an animal model for Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy, deteriorates by the lack of ADAM8, which is characterized by increased area of muscle degeneration and increased number of necrotic and calcified muscle fibers.
Although some studies have described the function of ADAM8 (a disintegrin and metalloprotease 8) related with rheumatoid arthritis, cancer and asthma, etc., the concrete role of ADAM8 in acute liver injury is still unknown.
The role of ADAM-8 in cancer and inflammatory diseases such as allergy, arthritis and asthma makes it an attractive target for drug development.
ADAM8 expression is increased in the interface tissue around a loosened hip prosthesis and in the pannus and synovium of patients with rheumatoid arthritis, but its potential role in these processes is unclear.
A disintegrin and metalloprotease-8 (ADAM8) is thought to play a role in cancer and inflammatory diseases such as allergy, arthritis, and asthma.
We therefore decided to test the role of ADAM8 in autoimmune inflammatory arthritis using transgenic mice expressing catalytically inactive ADAM8.
Transgenic DBA/1J mice expressing an inactivating point mutation in the ADAM8 gene to change Glu330 to Gln330 (ADAM8(EQ)) were generated to evaluate the proteolytic function of ADAM8 in an lipopolysaccharide-synchronized collagen-induced arthritis (LPS-CIA) model of autoimmune arthritis.
Expression profiling of paw joints from wild-type mice revealed that ADAM8 mRNA levels increased at the onset of clinical arthritis and correlated well with cellular macrophage markers.
When subjected to LPS-CIA, ADAM8(EQ) mice demonstrated decreased incidence and severity of clinical arthritis compared to wild-type mice.
We conclude that ADAM8 proteolytic activity plays a key role in the development of experimental arthritis and may thus be an attractive target for the treatment of arthritic disorders while minimizing risk of immunocompromise.
Further, BCO2 is associated with the development of mitochondrial oxidative stress, macular degeneration, anemia, and hepatic steatosis.
However, overexpression of a mutant NOD2, 3020insC, associated with severe Crohn's disease, results in enhanced HCMV replication and decreased levels of IFN-Beta in U373 cells.
The patient was started on therapy with interferon-beta for multiple sclerosis, prednizolone and azathioprine for Crohn's disease and oxybutynin hydrochloride for urine incontinence.
Overall, our findings suggest that the efficacy of nAChR agonists on enteric neurons is enhanced after long-term morphine exposure, and activation of the Alfa3Beta4 subtype of nAChR reverses chronic, but not acute, morphine-induced constipation.
The disruption of the nAChR-mediated positive feedback modulation by antidepressants might explain the frequent occurrence of constipation, a common side effect, attributed to these drugs.
Based on the results of previous studies, the ADD3 gene, located in the 10q24.2 region, may be a susceptibility gene of biliary atresia (BA).
Several polymorphisms in the human gene encoding MMP have been investigated for the association with ischemic stroke (IS) in the population, of which the MMP-1 -1607 1G/2G, -519 A/G, and MMP-12 -82 A/G polymorphisms gain more and more attention; however, the results are controversial and ambiguous.
This review will evaluate the evidence for associations between polymorphisms in MMP-1, 2, 3, 9, and 12 with ischemic stroke incidence, pathophysiology, and clinical outcome.
The mRNA transcripts and protein for TREM-1, MMP-1, MMP-9, collagen type I (COL1A1) and collagen type III (COL3A1) were analyzed by qPCR and immunofluorescence in both tissues and VSMCs isolated from atherosclerotic carotid plaques of symptomatic and asymptomatic patients with carotid stenosis.
Expression of SGLT1, is increased in patients with end-stage cardiomyopathy secondary to type 2 diabetes.
The expression of a novel cardiac glucose transporter, SGLT1, is increased in glycogen storage cardiomyopathy secondary to mutations in PRKAG2.
We sought to determine the role of SGLT1 in the pathogenesis of PRKAG2 cardiomyopathy and its role in cardiac structure and function.
Cardiac knockdown of SGLT1 in a murine model of PRKAG2 cardiomyopathy attenuates the disease phenotype, implicating SGLT1 in the pathogenesis.
Furthermore, it has been reported that perturbation of SGLT1 is associated with cardiomyopathy and cancer.
Sodium-dependent glucose cotransporters (SGLT1 and SGLT2), which have a key role in the absorption of glucose in the kidney and/or gastrointestinal tract, have been proposed as a novel therapeutic strategy for diabetes and cardiomyopathy.
However, the role and molecular mechanism of miR-137 and GLS in malignant melanoma has not been reported.
In this study, we showed that miR-137 was decreased in melanoma tissue, and the low miR-137 level and high GLS expression are independent risk factor in melanoma.
GLS is crucial for glutamine catabolism and growth of malignant melanoma.
We also demonstrated that miR-137 acts as a tumor suppressor in melanoma by targeting GLS.
The effects of these enzymes on the proliferation of gastric cancer cells were examined using siRNAs, Shikonin as a PKM2 inhibitor, or BPTES as a GLS inhibitor, in vitro and in vivo.
These findings suggested that PKM2 and GLS might play important roles in the proliferation of hypoxic gastric cancer cells.
A combination of PKM2 and GLS inhibitors might be therapeutically promising for the treatment of gastric cancer.
This study has identified GLS a potential therapeutic target in breast cancer, specifically in the basal subtype that exhibits a deregulated glutaminolysis pathway.
Using inducible shRNA mediated gene knockdown, we discovered that loss of GLS function in triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) cell lines with a deregulated glutaminolysis pathway led to profound tumor growth inhibition in vitro and in vivo.
The present study revealed that the loss of GLS1 expression by RNA interference or inhibitor decreased the proliferation and viability of colorectal cancer (CRC) cells.
In conclusion, the present study defined a key role of GLS1 in coupling glutaminolysis with elevated glucose uptake and consequently the growth of colon cancer cells.
Due to the functional importance of GLS1 in regulating cell metabolism, it was proposed that GLS1 may serve as a target for colorectal cancer therapy.
We demonstrate the glutaminase (GLS) is a direct target of miR-513c in human neuroblastoma cells.
In addition, we found restoration of GLS expression recovered the neuroblastoma cells' migration, invasion, and proliferation.
To compare homocysteine and thrombophilic mutations for the methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) C677T, factor V Leiden, and prothrombin G20210A between retinal vein occlusion (RVO) and healthy controls in a Turkish population.
Forty-nine subjects with RVO were compared for homocysteine status and the MTHFR C677T, prothrombin G20210A, and factor V Leiden mutations with those of 68 healthy controls.
Two RVO patients (4.1%) with bilateral involvement had MTHFR C677T mutation.
Screening for thrombophilic mutations such as MTHFR C677T, factor V Leiden, and prothrombin G20210A in RVO patients at all ages seems to be unnecessary and not cost-effective.
To evaluate the role of plasma total homocysteine (tHcy) and homozygosity for the thermolabile variant of the methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) C677T genotype in the risk of retinal vein occlusion (RVO).
No significant association between MTHFR C677T genotype and RVO was found under all genetic models.
There was no evidence to suggest an association between homozygosity for the MTHFR C677T genotype and RVO.
In 139 patients with CRVO (n = 88) and BRVO (n = 51) and in 40 healthy controls factor VIII, fibrinogen, antithrombin III, protein C, protein S, activated protein C resistance, anticardiolipin antibodies (ACA), homocysteine, factor V Leiden, prothrombin G20210A and methylene tetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) C677T mutation were assessed retrospectively.
Elevated factor VIII activity and the homozygous MTHFR C677T mutation were significantly more often found in CRVO and BRVO cases compared to controls.
We suggest elevated fibrinogen levels, ACA and the homozygous MTHFR C677T mutation as potential risk factors for CRVO/BRVO.
In our study, the FII G20210A and the MTHFR C677T mutations resulted significantly higher in patients than in controls; in contrast, thrombophilic mutation of FV, ACE, and PAI-1 genes was not statistically correlated with RVO.
The present study investigated the correlation between the antitumor effect of telomelysin and mRNA expression of hTERT and coxsackievirus and adenovirus receptor (CAR) in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) in vitro and whether telomelysin enhances the antitumor effect of paclitaxel or cisplatin, in vivo using a HNSCC xenograft model.
Even though adenoviral vector is widely used in gene therapy of squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck (SCCHN), the expression level of Coxsackievirus and adenovirus receptor (CAR) in SCCNH is not clearly defined.
Anti-TNF-Alfa antibody could reduce IR by inhibiting AKt/mTOR signaling pathway and the expression levels of NFKB, IKKBeta, and SOCS-3 in rats with sepsis-induced stress hyperglycemia.
MLDSTZ treatment induced glucose intolerance in both SOCS2+/+ and SOCS2-/- mice, as shown by glucose tolerance tests, with SOCS2+/+ mice showing a more marked intolerance, compared to SOCS2-/- mice.
Therapies aimed at inhibiting SOCS3 in skeletal muscle may be effective in reversing obesity-related glucose intolerance and insulin resistance.
Nonetheless, combined inactivation of SOCS-3 and PTP-1B in brain revealed additive effects on several parameters, including partial resistance to DIO and associated glucose intolerance.
Along with skeletal findings, HPP patients may present with hypercalcemia, seizures, pseudotumor cerebri, and pulmonary insufficiency.
Despite fluid resuscitation and insulin infusion of 0.1 unit/kg/h, which are the mainstays of therapy for DKA, her severe metabolic acidosis and altered mental status did not improve.
This metabolic acidosis can be associated with muscle wasting, development or exacerbation of bone disease, hypoalbuminemia, increased inflammation, progression of CKD, protein malnutrition, alterations in insulin, leptin, and growth hormone, and increased mortality.
Insulin and dextrose infusions were commenced and she was managed in intensive care unit where the metabolic acidosis resolved over a 12-h period.
Both of them were aggressively treated with intravenous fluids and insulin drip as per the protocol for the blood glucose levels till the anion gap normalized, and the metabolic acidosis reversed.
Recombinant antigens (rAgs) are available today which detect prepatent infections in onchocerciasis.
Therefore, inhibition of ADAMTS-3 upregulates Reelin activity and may be a potential therapeutic strategy for the prevention or treatment of neuropsychiatric and neurodegenerative disorders, such as schizophrenia and Alzheimer's disease.
We conducted quantitative real-time PCR analysis of active subfamilies of LINE1 repeats (aL1) using genomic DNA extracted from brain specimens of Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients and individuals without neuropsychiatric pathologies, as well as DNA extracted from blood specimens of individuals of different ages (healthy and AD subjects).
To examine whether informant-based assessments of patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD) can be used longitudinally to track patient functioning, the authors followed AD patients (N=153) and their caregivers over 1 year with the Relative's Assessment of Global Symptomatology-Elderly (RAGS-E) and the Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive Subscale (ADASc).
Using The Cancer Genome Atlas datasets to re-analyze the effect of some previously reported metastatic genes-e.g., JAM2, PPARGC1A, SIK2, and TRAF6-on overall survival of patients with renal and liver cancers, we found that these genes are actually protective factors for patients with cancer.
A cell wounding assay, cell spread assay and cell-matrix adhesion assay were carried out to analyze the cell movement and cell adhesion ability of colon cancer, immunoprecipitation and immunofluorescence assay was confirmed the interaction of PRL-3 and JAM2.
The findings of the present study revealed the roles of PRL-3 in cancer cell motility and adhesion process, and provided information on the possibility of PRL-3 increase cell-cell adhesion by associating with JAM2.
In this review, we briefly focus on what is currently known about the structure, function, and mechanism of JAM-B, with particular emphasis on cancer.
Aberrant expression of JAM-2 is associated with cancer progression but little work has been carried out in discovering how this affects changes in cell behaviour.
The present study aimed to examine the expression of JAM-2 in human colon cancer specimens and cell lines and its role in the development of colon cancer.
JAM-2 expression in human colon cancer specimens (normal, n=75; cancer, n=94) and cell lines was analysed using quantitative real-time PCR and conventional RT-PCR.
Colon cancer cells were stably transfected with a mammalian expression vector to overexpress JAM-2-Flag.
JAM-2 was lowly expressed in colon cancer cells such as RKO, HT115.
Taken together, JAM-2 may function as a putative tumour suppressor in the progression and metastasis of colorectal cancer.
We identified 27 mutated genes, of which 19 genes are reported in COSMIC database (ZNF208, CRNN, ATXN3, DCTN1, RP1L1, PRB4, PRB1, MUC4, HS6ST3, MUC17, JAM2, ITGAD, IREB2, IQUB, CORO1B, CCDC121, AKAP2, ACAN and ACADL), and eight genes have not previously been described in gastric cancer (CCDC178, ARMC4, TUBB6, PLIN4, PKLR, PDZD2, DMBT1and DAB1).Additionally,GPX4 and MPND in 19q13.3-13.4 region, is characterized as a novel fusion-gene.
In simple AD patients and AD patients complicated by allergic rhinitis or asthma, there were no significant differences in the Th9 cell percentage, PU.1 and IL-9 expression levels between them.
Appendicitis patients had lower level of neutrophil defensin mRNA (DEFA1,3), but higher levels of alkaline phosphatase (ALPL) and interleukin-8 receptor-Beta (CXCR2/IL8RB), which was confirmed in a larger cohort of 60 patients using droplet digital PCR (ddPCR).
K. pneumoniae-treated mice and controls additionally underwent inferior vena cava (IVC) ligation to generate VT. Lung-contusion mice demonstrated no increase in E-selectin or P-selectin whereas mice infected with K. pneumoniae demonstrated increased circulating P-selectin, ICAM-1, VCAM-1 and thrombin-antithrombin (TAT) complexes.
To test whether autoimmunity to sperm in men with cystic fibrosis (CF) is a result of cross-reactivity between sperm and carbohydrate sequences of the abnormal CF mucins, we investigated the possible epitope sharing between sperm surface antigens and CF mucin antigens using specific monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) directed to purified CF tracheobronchial mucin-1 (HTM-1) and the expression of tracheal mucin 8 gene (MUC8) mRNA in normal male and female reproductive tract tissues by Northern blot analysis.
It is interesting to note that RTN1 is localized to 14q23.1 where SPG15 locus was mapped.
Therefore, we considered RTN1 as a candidate gene for the SPG15 locus, but our mutational analysis possibly excludes RTN1 as causative gene.
We validated hundreds of nELAVL targets among which were important neuronal and disease-associated transcripts, including Alzheimer's disease (AD) transcripts.
We also examine the putative role and the observed changes of ELAV-like proteins and of their interactions with other regulatory elements in Alzheimer's disease, cancer, and inflammation.
Neuronal ELAV (nELAV) proteins are RNA-binding proteins which play a physiological role in controlling gene expression in memory formation, and their alteration may contribute to cognitive impairment associated with neurodegenerative pathologies such as Alzheimer's disease (AD).
Indeed, we found that the content of nELAV proteins is significantly decreased along with clinical dementia progression in the hippocampi of AD brains, where it inversely correlates with the amount of amyloid-beta (Abeta).
CR was registered in 3 of 8, 5 of 8 and 10 of 17 treated patients who were affected by extra-mammary Paget's disease (EMPD), erythroplasia of Queyrat (QD), and invasive squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), respectively.
Thus, in this work we aimed at i) identifying the interaction site of the Hsp27/eIF4E complex and ii) interfere with the relevant protein/protein association mechanism involved in castration-resistant progression of prostate cancer.
In order to find a potential inhibitor of Hsp27/eIF4E interaction, BRET assays in combination with molecular simulations identified the phenazine derivative 14 as the compound able to efficiently interfere with this protein/protein interaction, thereby inhibiting cell viability and increasing cell death in chemo- and castration-resistant prostate cancer models in vitro and in vivo.
Bioinformatics analysis and Luciferase reporter assays demonstrated that miR-455-3p directly targets and suppresses eIF4E, the rate-limiting factor for cap-dependent translation, which plays important roles in the initiation and progression of prostate cancers.
Further studies demonstrated that miR-455-3p inhibits cap-dependent translation and the proliferation of prostate cancer cells through targeting eIF4E.
Taken together, our findings suggest that miR-455-3p functions as a tumor suppressor by directly targeting eIF4E in prostate carcinogenesis and may be used as a potential target for therapeutic intervention in prostate cancer.
Translational control, mediated by the rate-limiting eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E (eIF4E), drives selective translation of several oncogenic proteins, thereby contributing to tumor growth, metastasis, and treatment resistance in various cancers, including prostate cancer.
We report that gal and VNPT55 profoundly inhibit migration and invasion of prostate cancer cells, possibly by down-regulating protein expression of several EMT markers (Snail, Slug, N-cadherin, vimentin, and MMP-2/-9) via antagonizing the Mnk-eIF4E axis.
The synthesis and in vitro and in vivo antibreast and antiprostate cancers activities of novel C-4 heteroaryl 13-cis-retinamides that modulate Mnk-eIF4E and AR signaling are discussed.
Androgen receptor (AR) and MNK activated eIF4E signaling promotes the development and progression of prostate cancer (PCa).
Our findings provide the first preclinical evidence that simultaneous inhibition of AR and eIF4E activation is a novel and efficacious therapeutic approach for PCa, and that NRs hold significant promise for treatment of advanced prostate cancer.
Previously, various associations between Phe and hyperprolactinemia were revealed in studies performed in phenylketonuria (PKU) children and adolescents.
We have therefore evaluated whether increased serum Phe concentrations lead to increased prolactin (PRL) secretion in phenylketonuria.
In patients with phenylketonuria (PKU), we found normal PRL responses to phenylalanine, demonstrating that conversion of phenylalanine to tyrosine is not necessary for PRL stimulation.
Thus, we designed and synthesized novel pyrimidinyl acyl thiourea derivatives to selectively inhibit Hsp90 alpha in human invasive ductal breast (MCF-7) and human bone osteosarcoma (Saos-2) cell lines.
Inhibition of oncogenic BRAF(V600E) or MEK-attenuated activation of inositol-requiring enzyme 1 (IRE1) and activating transcription factor 6 (ATF6) signaling of the UPR in melanoma cells.
Moreover, XBP-1, which is known to be transcriptionally regulated by ATF6 and functionally activated by IRE1 alpha, was found to play an important role in 2-DG-mediated transcriptional up-regulation of TRAIL-R2 in melanoma cells.
These results indicate that 2-DG sensitizes human melanoma cells to TRAIL-induced apoptosis by up-regulation of TRAIL-2 via the ATF6/IRE1 alpha/XBP-1 axis of the unfolded protein response.
In one melanoma line, there was clear evidence of activation of the IRE1alpha pathway, and small interfering RNA (siRNA) knockdown of IRE1alpha substantially reduced the up-regulation of TRAIL-R2.
We further examined CNV of NKG2C and HLA-E allelic distribution in 653 patients afflicted with nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) in Hunan province.
Genetic modulation or pharmacologic inhibition of RHAMM activity was sufficient and necessary for metastatic phenotypes induced by RB loss in prostate cancer.
Collectively, our findings show how RB loss drives metastatic capacity and highlight RHAMM as a candidate therapeutic target for treating advanced prostate cancer.
However the role of HA receptors CD44 and Hyaluronan Mediated Motility Receptor (RHAMM) in regulating the growth of bladder cancer cells driven by loss of AGL has not been studied.
Western blot analysis and Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase (TdT) dUTP Nick-End Labeling (TUNEL) assay was carried out to study cellular apoptosis with HAS2, CD44 and RHAMM loss in bladder cancer cells with and without AGL expression.
Higher amounts of cleaved Cas3, Cas9 and PARP was observed in AGL low bladder cancer cell with loss of HAS2, CD44 or RHAMM.
TUNEL staining showed more apoptotic cells with loss of HAS2, CD44 or RHAMM in AGL low bladder cancer cells.
This revealed that bladder cancer cells whose aggressive growth is mediated by loss of AGL are susceptible to apoptosis with loss of HAS2, CD44 or RHAMM.
Interestingly loss of either CD44 or RHAMM induces apoptosis in different low AGL expressing bladder cancer cell lines.
Growth assays showed that loss of CD44 and RHAMM predominantly inhibit anchorage dependent and independent growth of AGL low bladder cancer cells.
Clinicopathologic analysis revealed that high RHAMM mRNA expression is a marker of poor patient outcome in bladder cancer and patients with high RHAMM and low AGL tumor mRNA expression have poor survival.
Our findings strongly point to the importance of the HAS2-HA-CD44/RHAMM pathway for rapid growth of bladder cancer cells with loss of AGL and provides rational for targeting this pathway at various steps for "personalized" treatment of bladder cancer patients based of their AGL expression status.
In vitro knock-down of RHAMM, CD44 and HAS isoenzymes was achieved by siRNA and lentiviral shRNA in J82 bladder cancer cells.
Subsequently, Kaplan-Meier analysis revealed reduced bladder cancer specific survival in patients with high RHAMM mRNA and low HAS3v1 expression.
The data suggest that RHAMM plays a crucial role in mediating progression of muscle-invasive bladder cancer and recommends RHAMM for further evaluation as a prognostic marker or therapeutic target in bladder cancer therapy.
Clinical and oncological data from men with localised prostate adenocarcinoma were also assessed and compared with RHAMM expression data.
There was no RHAMM expression in any tissue from normal patients or those with BPH or prostate cancer without ADT.
There was RHAMM expression in 39.4% of prostate cancer tissues treated with ADT and in 46.2% of CRPC samples (P = 0.001).
No prognostic or clinical factors related to prostate cancer were associated with RHAMM expression.
RHAMM expression in prostate cancer is directly associated with ADT.
When prostate cancer becomes CRPC, RHAMM expression is higher.
RHAMM expression was not associated with prostate cancer prognostic factors.
RHAMM overexpression may contribute to the development of hormonal resistance in prostate cancer.
With regards to genodermatosis (neurofibromatosis type I, cutis laxa, pseudoxanthoma elasticum, epidermolysis bullosa, ichtyoses and pilar diseases), we found novel facts in the fields of molecular analysis, clinical aspects, pathophysiology and quality of life.
In IL-23p19(-/-), IL-22(-/-) and IL-18(-/-) mice viable C. jejuni were detected in MLNs, but did not translocate to spleen, liver, kidney and blood in the majority of cases.
The mRNA expression levels of miR-200c and USP25 were examined in NSCLC cell lines and patient specimens using quantitative reverse transcription-PCR.
The protein expression levels of USP25 were examined in NSCLC cell lines and patient specimens using western blot and immunohistochemical staining.
Further studies revealed that USP25 was a downstream target of miR-200c in NSCLC cells as miR-200c bound directly to the 3'-untranslated region of USP25, thus reducing both the messenger RNA and protein levels of USP25.
Moreover, USP25 protein and mRNA level expressions were higher in NSCLC patients, compared to healthy control, and correlated with clinical stage and lymphatic node metastasis.
These findings indicate that miR-200c exerts tumor-suppressive effects for NSCLC through the suppression of USP25 expression and suggests a new therapeutic application of miR-200c in the treatment of NSCLC.
Based on own current research results, this viewpoint essay provides important insights that Hsp90 is also involved as a notable pathophysiological factor in autoimmune blistering dermatoses including epidermolysis bullosa acquisita, bullous pemphigoid and possibly dermatitis herpetiformis.
To further study the role of Hsp in autoimmune bullous diseases, we have investigated for the first time the humoral autoimmune response to Hsp40, Hsp60, Hsp70, and Hsp90 in patients with dermatitis herpetiformis (DH; n = 26), bullous pemphigoid (BP; n = 23), and pemphigus vulgaris (PV; n = 16), the first representing a cutaneous manifestation of celiac disease.
The general classes of disorders covered in this complex review are: peroxisomal disorders (adrenoleukodystrophy), lysosomal storage disorders (including metachromatic leukodystrophy, Krabbe or globoid cell leukodystrophy, Fabry, Niemann-Pick, GM1, GM2, Gaucher, mucopolysaccharidoses, and Salla diseases), mitochondrial disorders (including mitochondrial encephalomyopathy with lactic acidosis and strokelike episodes, myoclonic epilepsy with ragged red fibers, Leigh disease, and Kearns-Sayre syndrome), urea cycle disorders, several organic acidemias (including phenylketonuria, maple syrup urine disease, 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl colyase deficiency, glutaric acidurias, methylmalonic academia, proprionic academia, 3-methylglucatonic aciduria, and 2-hydroxyglutaric acidurias), cytoskeletal or transporter molecule defects (including Alexander or fibrinoid leukodystrophy, proteolipid protein-1 defect or Pelizaeus Merzbacher, Wilson, and Huntington diseases), and several neurodegenerative disorders of brain iron accumulation.
Inborn errors of purine metabolism, either deficiencies of synthesis or catabolism pathways, lead to a wide spectrum of clinical presentations: urolithiasis (adenine phosphoribosyltransferase), primary immune deficiency (adenosine deaminase deficiency and purine nucleoside phosphorylase deficiency), severe intellectual disability, and other neurological symptoms (Lesch-Nyhan disease, adenylosuccinase deficiency, and molybdenum cofactor deficiency).
The phenotypical suppression of the purine nucleoside phosphorylase deficiency is the result of the mutations (called pnd), which are mapped on the chromosome of E. coli beyond the region of the structural pup-gene location and have phenotypic manifestation distinct from that of pup+ allele: a) pnd mutants divide into some groups for the ability of utilizing several purine nucleosides, including xantosine that cannot be metabolized by pnd+ strains of E. coli; b) pnd mutations do not restore the ability of purine auxotrophs (pur) defective in purine nucleoside phosphorylase (pup) and adenine phosphoribosyltransferase (apt) to grow on the medium with adenine as the sole source of purines.
Mutations of SLC9A6 may cause an X-linked clinical syndrome first described by Christianson in 1999 in which affected males exhibited profound intellectual disability, autism, drug-resistant epilepsy, ophthalmoplegia, mild craniofacial dysmorphism, microcephaly, and ataxia.
Coagulation factor IX (recombinant), albumin fusion protein (Idelvion) for hemophilia B; captisol-enabled melphalan hydrochloride (Evomela) for multiple myeloma; and antihemophilic factor (recombinant) (Kovaltry) for hemophilia A.
An initial presentation of hematological malignancies associated with autoantibodies is not common, and there is only one documented case of multiple myeloma presenting with acquired FVIII inhibitor for multiple myeloma.
In this paper, we describe a second case of multiple myeloma who presented with acquired FVIII inhibitor.
The patient was diagnosed with the IgG kappa type of multiple myeloma associated with acquired FVIII inhibitor.
Clinicians should be alert to the presence of rare underlying neoplastic diseases such as multiple myeloma, in patients with acquired FVIII inhibitor.
In order to measure the levels of Dynamin1, we isolated cortical white matter from a total of 34 post-mortem brains derived from controls (N=11), mixed Alzheimer's disease (AD) and VaD (N=8), VaD (N=7), and stroke no dementia (SND, N=8) subjects.
We performed a retrospective analysis of 531 paired liver stiffness measurements made by Fibroscan when the study began (LSM1) and at follow-up (LSM2), more than 1 day and less than 1 year apart, from 432 stable (for body mass index, waist circumference, and alcohol consumption), untreated, immunocompetent patients with chronic liver disease (from January 2006 through March 2009).
Patient 1 was hypotonic and dysmorphic at birth, with aplasia of the posterior corpus callosum, bilateral ptosis, oculomotor paralysis, down-slanting palpebral fissures, facial asymmetry, submucosal cleft palate, micrognathia, wide-spaced nipples, right-sided aortic arch, hypospadias, bilateral inguinal hernias, double toenail of the left second toe, partial 2-3 toe syndactyly, kyphoscoliosis and colonic atony.
mTORC 1 inhibitor PRP-1 caused significant upregulation of tumor suppressors, such as miR20a, miR125b, and miR192; and downregulation of onco miRNAs, miR509-3p, miR589, miR490-3p, miR 550 in human chondrosarcoma JJ012 cell line.
As described in the literature, hereditary angioedema (HAE) is an autosomal dominant disease that presents with recurrent events of angioedema caused by a) deficiency or b) functional alteration of the plasma protein C1 inhibitor (C1-inh); this enzyme is involved in the regulation of the complement, kallikrein-kinin, fibrinolytic, and coagulation systems.
Hereditary angioedema (HAE) is an autosomal dominant disease characterized by recurrent angioedema episodes caused by a quantitative or functional defect of the plasma protein C1 esterase inhibitor (C1-INH).
Hereditary angioedema (HAE) is a rare, life-threatening, autosomal dominant disease characterized by recurrent episodes of angioedema, and caused by a deficiency of the plasma protein C1-esterase inhibitor (C1-INH).
Hereditary angioedema (HAE) is an autosomal dominant disease characterized by recurrent episodes of angioedema, and caused by a deficiency of the plasma protein C1 inhibitor.
To assess the use of serum levels of angiopoietin-1 (Ang1), Ang2 and tumor necrosis factor-Alfa (TNFAlfa) as predictive factors for small bowel angiodysplasia (SBA).
Gene expression levels of Ang-1, Ang-2, and their receptor Tie2 were all significantly higher in biopsies from areas of angiodysplasia compared with normal small bowel.
We undertook this study to find new members of the cancer-testis gene family appropriate for cancer immunotherapy We analyzed the expression of six testis-specific genes called ODF1, ODF2, ODF3, ODF4, LEMD1 and SPATA19 in 30 prostate cancer and 25 benign prostate hyperplasia (BPH) samples by RT-PCR and restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP).
Of the prostate cancer samples, 10, 10, 23 and 40% showed ODF1, ODF2, LEMD1 and SPATA19 specific bands, respectively, but none of the BPH samples expressed any of these genes.
ODF1, ODF2, SPATA19 and LEMD1 are members of cancer-testis gene family.
To identify the miRNA signature that was specific for oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC), we first examined expression profiles of 148 miRNAs in a panel of 18 OSCC cell lines and the immortalized oral keratinocyte line RT7 as a control.
Compared with RT7, the expression of 54 miRNAs (36.5%) was frequently down-regulated in OSCC lines (&lt;0.5-fold expression, &gt;or=66.7% of 18 lines).
Pain conditions included neuropathic pain, fibromyalgia, complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS) type I and post-surgical chronic back and leg pain (CBLP).
The following recommendations were reached: 'weak' for SCS added to conventional medical management in diabetic painful neuropathy, CBLP and CRPS, for SCS versus reoperation in CBLP, for MCS in neuropathic pain, for rTMS of M1 in neuropathic pain and fibromyalgia and for tDCS of M1 in neuropathic pain; 'inconclusive' for DBS in neuropathic pain, rTMS and tDCS of the DLPFC, and for motor cortex tDCS in fibromyalgia and spinal cord injury pain.
The aim is to assess the ability to discriminate words, using two psychoacoustic verbal tests of central auditory processes in Spanish: Binaural Fusion Test (BFT in its Spanish version) and Filtered Word Test (FWT in its Spanish version) in children with dyslexia and controls.
Anemia grade 2 was seen in 16.0%, neutropenia grade 3 in 8.0% and thrombocytopenia grade 3 in 24.0% of patients, respectively.
Thrombocytopenia occurred in 56% of the dogs (grade 1 in 3 dogs, grade 2 in 6 dogs, grade 3 in 7 dogs, and grade 4 in 7 dogs) and neutropenia in 17% of the dogs (grade 2 in 1 dog, grade 3 in 2 dogs, and grade 4 in 4 dogs).
Hematological toxicity: leucopenia grade 3 or 4 in 21/75 courses; thrombocytopenia grade 3 in 8/75 courses; infectious episodes grade 2 or 3 in 7/75 courses.
Neutropenia was grade 3 in 8.6% of patients and grade 4 in 5.2% of patients, and thrombocytopenia was grade 3 in 17.2% of patients and grade 4 in 12% of patients; hepatic and pulmonary toxic effects were grade 3 in 5.2% and 8.6% of patients, respectively.
The chief toxicity was bone marrow suppression, with grade 4 granulocytopenia in 20 patients, grade 3 in 7 patients, and grade 3 and 4 thrombocytopenia in 5 patients.
Furthermore, ephrinB1 depletion by siRNA suppresses EphB2-Fc-induced RhoA activation, and reduces motility and invasiveness of the SW480 and Hs578T human cancer cell lines.
In the current study, we investigated whether EphB2 knockdown in combination with radiation can alter invasiveness and decrease medulloblastoma tumor growth or viability in vitro.
The radiosensitization effect following EphB2 knockdown was determined by clonogenic assay in human medulloblastoma cells.
We observed that EphB2 is expressed in both medulloblastoma cell lines and patient samples and its downregulation sensitized these cells to radiation as evident by decreased clonogenic survival fractions.
EphB2 expression was also high across different medulloblastoma subgroups compared to normal cerebellum.
We also found that the combined approach of EphB2 knockdown and radiation exposure significantly reduced overall cell viability in medulloblastoma cells compared to control groups.
Overall, our findings indicate that specific targeting of EphB2 receptor in combination with radiation may serve as an effective therapeutic strategy in medulloblastoma.
However, the expression levels and clinical significances of junctional adhesion molecule-A, a member of junctional adhesion molecules, and EphB2, a member of Eph/ephrin family, in lung adenocarcinoma patients are unclear.
Therefore, in this study, we aimed to identify the expression and prognostic values of junctional adhesion molecule-A and EphB2 in lung adenocarcinoma patients' cohort.
In our study, 70 (55.6%) showed high expression of junctional adhesion molecule-A protein and 51 (40.5%) showed high expression of EphB2 protein in 126 lung adenocarcinoma tissues.
Junctional adhesion molecule-A and EphB2 expressions were both significantly increased in tumor tissues compared with noncancerous lung tissues.
Kaplan-Meier analysis and log-rank test indicated that low expression of junctional adhesion molecule-A and EphB2 proteins can predict better survival and low mortality rate of lung adenocarcinomas.
In univariate analysis, high expression levels of junctional adhesion molecule-A and EphB2 were both found to be significantly correlated with poor overall survival of lung adenocarcinoma patients (hazard ratio = 1.791, 95% confidence interval = 1.041-3.084, p = 0.035; hazard ratio = 1.762, 95% confidence interval = 1.038-2.992, p = 0.036, respectively).
The multivariate Cox proportional hazard model demonstrated that EphB2 expression is an independent prognosis parameter in lung adenocarcinoma patients (hazard ratio = 1.738, 95% confidence interval = 1.023-2.952, p = 0.016).
Taken together, high expression of junctional adhesion molecule-A and EphB2 can predict poor overall survival and high mortality rate, and EphB2 is an independent prognostic biomarker in lung adenocarcinoma patients.
Four of the six patients with aNTs underwent Kausch-Whipple procedure, one patient ampullectomy (gangliocytic paraganglioma) and one patient palliative chemotherapy.
Toll-like receptors (TLR), especially TLR3, 7 and 9, play an important role in the pathogenesis of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).
Alstroem syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by hearing loss, blindness, obesity, non-insulin dependent diabetes, and others.
A number of known inherited syndromes, such as ataxia telangiectasia, ataxia-telangiectasia like-disorder, radiosensitive severe combined immunodeficiency, Nijmegen breakage syndrome, and LIG4 deficiency are associated with increased radiosensitivity and/or cancer risk.
Cellular radiosensitivity in the absence of clinical manifestations of Ataxia telangiectasia lead to the diagnosis of DNA ligase IV (LIG4) deficiency syndrome, confirmed by compound heterozygous mutations in the LIG4 gene.
Cellular hypersensitivity was confirmed in vitro and attributed to the ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) gene in cases I and II, a newly described defect in the DNA ligase 4 gene in case III, and a novel and as yet incompletely defined, molecular defect in case IV who presented with xeroderma pigmentosum (XP).
To detect new predictive markers from the prostate cancer tissue, to study the expression by cultured cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) of stromal factors implicated in prostate carcinogenesis, and to compare their expressions in localized, metastatic, castration-sensitive (CSCP), castration-resistant prostate tumors (CRCP) as well as in fibroblasts from benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH).
The goal of this study was to determine the risk of special adverse events related to CYP- 17 inhibitor in patients with metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRCP).
Despite the initial response, patients typically relapse with a more aggressive form described as castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRCP), driven by continued androgen receptor (AR) signaling.
In CRCP, prostate cancer cells still rely on intracellular androgens and, to a greater extent, on active AR for growth and survival.
We previously reported that the intronic tagSNP +357G/C in the metastasis suppressor HTPAP is associated with metastasis and prognosis of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
By using publicly available genomic data from a panel of 883 cell lines derived from different cancers, we identified the cell lines presenting amplification of both WHSC1L1 and PPAPDC1B.
In particular, we focused on cell lines derived from lung cancer and pancreatic adenocarcinoma and found a correlation between the amplification of PPAPDC1B and WHSC1L1 with their overexpression.
Loss-of-function studies based on the use of siRNA and shRNA demonstrated that PPAPDC1B and WHSC1L1 played a major role in regulating the survival of pancreatic adenocarcinoma and small-cell lung cancer-derived cell lines, both in anchorage-dependent and anchorage-independent conditions, displaying amplification and overexpression of these genes.
Finally, quantitative RT-PCR experiments after PPAPDC1B and WHSC1L1 knockdown revealed exclusive PPAPDC1B and WHSC1L1 gene targets in small-cell lung cancer and pancreatic adenocarcinoma-derived cell lines compared with breast cancer.
The phosphatidic acid phosphatase HTPAP has been defined as a metastatic suppressor of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), but little is known about its function or potential applications as a prognostic marker.
An analysis of comparative genomic hybridization array and expression profiling data for a series of 152 ductal breast carcinomas and 21 cell lines identified five genes (LSM1, BAG4, DDHD2, PPAPDC1B, and WHSC1L1) within the amplified region as consistently overexpressed due to an increased gene copy number.
The potential of PPAPDC1B, which encodes a transmembrane phosphatase, as a therapeutic target was further shown by the strong inhibition of growth of breast tumor xenografts displaying 8p11-12 amplification induced by the silencing of PPAPDC1B.
The increased vulnerability to AF in FKBP12.6-/- mice substantiates the notion that defective SR Ca(2+) release caused by abnormal RyR2 and FKBP12.6 interactions may contribute to the initiation or maintenance of atrial fibrillation.
So, it is hypothesized that genetic alterations of SEPT12 may be concerned in male infertility.
The objective of this research is exploration of new single nucleotide polymorphism G5508A in the SEPT12 gene association with idiopathic male infertility in Iranian men.
Taken together, our results demonstrate the molecular architecture of SEPT12 filaments at the sperm annulus, their mechanical support of sperm motility, and their correlation with male infertility.
This study provides the first causal link between SEPTIN12 genetic variant and male infertility with distinctive sperm pathology.
To investigate the association between SEPTIN12 gene variants and the risk of azoospermia caused by meiotic arrest.
Mutational analysis of the SEPTIN12 gene was performed using DNA from 30 Japanese patients with azoospermia by meiotic arrest and 140 fertile male controls.
The c.204G&gt;C (Gln38His) variant in the SEPTIN12 gene was associated with increased susceptibility to azoospermia caused by meiotic arrest.
Therefore, we hypothesized that mutation or polymorphisms of SEPTIN12  participate in male infertility, especially Sertoli cell-only syndrome  (SCOS).
To investigate whether SEPTIN12 gene defects are associated  with azoospermia caused by SCOS, mutational analysis was performed in 100  Japanese patients by direct sequencing of coding regions.
No  mutations were found in SEPTIN12 ; however, 8 coding  single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP1-SNP8) could be detected in the  patients with SCOS.
Here we describe a new and highly efficient antipneumococcal vaccine design based on synthetic conjugation of S. pneumoniae capsule polysaccharides to the potent lipid antigen Alfa-galactosylceramide, which stimulates invariant natural killer T (iNKT) cells when presented by the nonpolymorphic antigen-presenting molecule CD1d.
Our findings indicate that p38Gamma and p38Delta are potential therapeutic targets in complex diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis, that involve innate and adaptive immune responses.
Among them, compound 4a, (S)-2-(4-fluorophenyl)-4-(1,2,3,5,6,8a-hexahydroindolizin-7-yl)-3-(pyridin-4-yl)-1H-pyrrole (R-132811), achieved the most promising results in various in vitro and in vivo tests including several rheumatoid arthritis models ((i) inhibition of p38alpha, p38beta, p38gamma, and p38delta MAP kinases: IC(50)=0.034, 0.572, &gt;10, and &gt;10 microM, respectively; (ii) inhibition of TNFalpha, IL-1beta, IL-6, and IL-8 production in human whole blood: IC(50)=0.026, 0.020, 0.88, and 0.016 microM, respectively; (iii) inhibition of LPS induced TNFalpha, IL-1beta and IL-6 production in mice: ID(50)=0.93, 8.63, and 0.11 mg/kg, p.o., respectively; (iv) inhibition of anti-collagen antibody-induced arthritis in mice: ID(50)=2.22 mg/kg, p.o.
To study was to study the expression of CD40/CD40L in colon cancer and investigate the effects of CD40/CD40L overexpression on the proliferation and apoptosis of SW48 colon cancer cell line.
Immunohistochemistry was used to detect the expression of CD40 protein in colon cancer tissue samples from 70 patients, and 10 adjacent normal tissue samples.
A CD40L gene-containing plasmid was transfected into SW48 colon cancer cells using lipofectamine 2000.
The expression of CD40 in colorectal cancer tissue was significantly higher than in normal adjacent tissue.
In conclusion, CD40 protein expression was significantly higher in colon cancer tissue compared with normal tissue, and the apoptosis of SW48 colon cancer cells can be induced by CD40L gene transfection.
We also uncovered a strong correlation between survival of colorectal cancer patients and NOS2, CD40, and TNF expression in their tumors.
We reveal here a correlation between CD40 expression and colon cancer differentiation.
Upon CD40 ligand (CD40L) binding, CD40/CD40L signaling inhibited colon cancer proliferation, induced apoptosis, stalled cells at G0/G1, and influenced cell adhesion and metastasis.
Real-time PCR and western blotting analysis showed that AHRR expression in colon cancer cells was up-regulated by CD40L binding.
First, insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor antibody therapy resulted in hyperglycemia and metabolic syndrome most likely due to disruption of insulin-like growth factor-1 homeostasis and subsequent growth hormone elevation.
More specifically, it has been shown that the miR-194 can target the insulin-like growth factor receptor 1 (IGF1R) and silence its protein expression resulting in hyperglycemia.
Using the 30% total body surface area (TBSA) model of burn injury in rats we found that the miRNA let-7b can target IGF1R and downregulate its protein expression, in turn attenuating PI3K/Akt and Gsk3Beta activation leading to hyperglycemia.
In vivo targeting of let-7b by antagomir mitigated the effect of increased let-7b expression on IGF1R protein expression and hyperglycemia.
The findings are of significant importance as they demonstrate for the first time the contribution of IGF-1 receptors (IGF-1R) and Akt signaling in cardiac hypertrophy but not in cardiac autophagy regulation in obesity and T2DM.
Together, our results suggest a mechanism by which coxsackieviral infection induces CryAB degradation and loss-of-function, resulting in desmin aggregation, ultimately contributing to compromised cytoskeletal integrity and viral cardiomyopathy.
We identified by a next-generation sequencing panel the novel CRYAB missense mutation c.326A&gt;G, p.D109G in a small family with RCM in combination with skeletal myopathy with an early onset of the disease.
Mutations of HSPB5 (also known as CRYAB or AlfaB-crystallin), a bona fide heat shock protein and molecular chaperone encoded by the HSPB5 (crystallin, alpha B) gene, are linked to multisystem disorders featuring variable combinations of cataracts, cardiomyopathy, and skeletal myopathy.
This study aimed to investigate the pathological mechanisms involved in an early-onset myofibrillar myopathy manifesting in a child harboring a homozygous recessive mutation in HSPB5, 343delT.
These data support a loss-of-function model for the myopathy observed in the patient because the insoluble mutant would be unavailable to perform normal functions of HSPB5, although additional gain-of-function effects of the mutant protein cannot be excluded.
Here we report that NFKB transcription factor is activated by misincorporation of amino acid analogues into proteins, inhibition of proteasomal activity, expression of the R120G mutated form of HspB5 (associated with myofibrillar myopathy), or expression of the G985R and G93A mutated forms of superoxide dismutase 1 (linked to familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis).
The boundaries of this concept are still uncertain, and whereas six genes (DES, CRYAB, LDB3/ZASP, MYOT, FLNC and BAG3) are now classically considered as responsible for MFM, other entities such as FHL1 myopathy or Hereditary Myopathy with Early Respiratory Failure linked to mutations of titin can now as well be included in this group.
In the present study, we demonstrate that lncRNA TRERNA1 acts like an enhancer of SNAI1 to promote cell invasion and migration and to contribute to metastasis of gastric cancer (GC).
treRNA is a long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) involved in cancer progression.
Suppression of treRNA by miR-190a led to significant changes of mesenchymal-epithelial transition markers and impaired migration and invasion capability of hepatoma cells.
Our results reveal the involvement of miR-190a-treRNA axis in hepatoma progression and shed light on lncRNA-based cancer therapies for hepatoma patients at high risk of metastasis.
We found that treRNA is upregulated in paired clinical breast cancer primary and lymph-node metastasis samples, and that its expression stimulates tumour invasion in vitro and metastasis in vivo.
The aim of this study was to determine the expression levels of EP300, TP53 and BAX genes and their respective proteins in clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) and evaluate the value of these factors as prognostic factors.
Bioinformatics assessment revealed a correlation between p300, EGR1 and MAML1 copy number and mRNA alterations in renal clear cell carcinoma and p300, EGR1 and MAML1 gene alterations were associated with increased overall survival.
We propose that activation of TRPV1 and TRPA1 receptors by H2S during neuro-inflammation conditions contributes to the nociceptive firing in primary afferents underlying migraine pain.
Methods We investigated the functional roles of TRPM8 and TRPV1 in a meningeal inflammation-based migraine model by measuring the effects of facial TRPM8 activation on thermal allodynia and assessing receptor coexpression changes in TG neurons.
Conclusions Our findings provide a plausible mechanism to explain how facial TRPM8 activation can relieve migraine by suppressing TRPV1 activity.
Using case-control comparisons, we analyzed eight single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in genes definitively associated with interindividual variation in leukocyte telomere length (LTL) in prior genome-wide association studies: ACYP2, TERC, NAF1, TERT, OBFC1, CTC1, ZNF208 and RTEL1 Six of these SNPs were associated (P &lt; 0.05) with neuroblastoma risk, one with leukemia risk and one with osteosarcoma risk.
Three polypeptides, primarily positioned 5' to the damage, are in close physical proximity to the psoralen lesion and thus are cross-linked to the damaged DNA: these proteins are RPA70, RPA32, and the XPD subunit of TFIIH.
Based on these results, we propose that RPA70 makes the initial contact with psoralen-damaged DNA but that within preincision complexes, it is RPA32 and XPD that are in close contact with the lesion.
It has potential use as an antagonist in the treatment of CCR9-overexpressed carcinoma.
Taken together, these results indicate that ATC cells down-regulate D6/ACKR2 expression through miR-146a activity to sustain leukocyte trafficking inside tumor microenvironment and shed light on a novel mechanism by which NF-KB indirectly inhibits the expression and the function of anti-tumorigenic gene in thyroid cancer.
Here, we provide a summary of the data on the role of ACKR2 expressed by lymphatics, indicating an essential role for this ACKRs in the regulation of the inflammation and the immune response in different pathological conditions, including infection, allergy, and cancer.
Using a computational approach, we deconvoluted expression data from a mixed physical co-culture of GBM cells and ECs and identified a previously undescribed upregulation of the cAMP specific phosphodiesterase PDE7B in GBM cells in response to direct contact with ECs.
We further found that elevated PDE7B expression occurs in most GBM cases and has a negative effect on survival.
PDE7B overexpression resulted in the expansion of a stem-like cell subpopulation in vitro and increased tumor growth and aggressiveness in an in vivo intracranial GBM model.
Collectively these studies illustrate a novel approach for studying cell-cell interactions and identifying new therapeutic targets like PDE7B in GBM.
In order to determine the relationship between expression of cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase isoform 7B (PDE7B) and mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) progression, PDE7B mRNA expression was measured by qRT-PCR in 21 untreated MCL patients with bone marrow involvement and 20 healthy donors.
Expression of cyclic adenosine monophosphate-specific phosphodiesterase 7B (PDE7B) mRNA is increased in patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), thus suggesting that variation may occur in the PDE7B gene in CLL.
To investigate the expression level of cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase (PDE) 7B mRNA and its prognostic value in mantle cell lymphoma (MCL), the real-time quantitative RT-PCR (QPCR) was used to detect pde7b expression levels of bone marrow mononuclear cells from 20 newly diagnosed MCL patients with bone marrow involvement and peripheral blood mononuclear cells from 20 normal persons, the association of pde7b expression levels with prognostic indexes was analyzed by statistical software.
Pitx1 transcripts increased significantly in control mice with induced hypothyroidism, but they remained unchanged in Pitx2(flox/-);Tg(Tshb-cre) mice, possibly because Pitx1 levels were already maximally elevated in untreated mutants.
These results suggest that PITX2 and PITX1 have overlapping roles in thyrotroph function and response to hypothyroidism.
We excluded germline mutations in PHEX, FGF23, DMP1, and ENPP1 (genes for hereditary hypophosphatemic rickets) and somatic mutations in the GNAS and HRAS/KRAS (the disease-causing genes for McCune-Albright syndrome and linear nevus sebaceous syndrome, respectively).
Fibrous dysplasia of bone (FD) is associated with increased total FGF23 levels (cFGF23 + iFGF23); however, classic hypophosphatemic rickets is uncommon.
There were two confirmed partial responses in patients with triple-negative breast cancer (TP53-mutated) and melanoma (n = 1 each) and one unconfirmed partial response in a patient with cancer of unknown primary origin.Conclusions: Chk1 inhibition with GDC-0425 in combination with gemcitabine was tolerated with manageable bone marrow suppression.
The goals of our studies were to characterize the brain distribution, pharmacodynamic (PD) effect, and efficacy of GDC-0084 in orthotopic xenograft models of GBM.
Mice bearing U87 or GS2 intracranial tumors were treated with GDC-0084 to assess its brain distribution by matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization (MALDI) imaging and measure its PD effects and efficacy in GBM orthotopic models.
Pigmented lesion clinics (PLCs) that use technology such as digital dermoscopy and total-body photography are thought to confer a clinical advantage for patients at high risk of developing melanoma over general dermatology clinics (GDCs) with regular dermoscopy.
To examine the difference between depths of melanomas diagnosed in a PLC and a GDC.
The average Breslow depth for melanomas at the PLC was also smaller compared with the GDC (0.0371 vs 0.3450 mm; P = .02).
Inhibitors currently in clinical trials, INCB024360, GDC-0919, indoximod, and an IDO1 peptide-based vaccine, are being evaluated for their efficacy against a wide range of cancers including melanoma, glioblastoma, non-small cell lung, pancreatic, and/or breast cancer, as well as metastatic disease.
From 2001 to 2006, 11 patients with MVAC-treated metastatic urothelial carcinoma received as a second-line therapy GDC therapy consisting of gemcitabine (1,000 mg/m2) on day land 8, docetaxel (80 mg/m2) on day 1 and carboplatin (AUC 5) on day 1 in each 21-day cycle.
GDC regimen as a second-line chemotherapy was effective in 54% of patients with MVAC-treated metastatic urothelial carcinoma, although the high incidence of hematologic toxicities and short period of progression-free survival remain to be major problems.
The number of Foxp3+ T cells and the expression of IL-10, TGF-Beta1 and FOXP3 in infected patients with gastritis were significantly higher than the ones in infected patients with peptic ulcer.
These results indicate that the percentage of CD4(+) Foxp3(+) Treg cells are increased in H. pylori-infected mice, suggesting a role of Treg cells in H. pylori-induced pathologies, even at the early stages of chronic gastritis and gastric tumorigenesis.
We found a significant association between autism and a coding variant in the seizure-related gene SEZ6L2 (12/1106 autism vs. 3/1161 controls; p = 0.018).
Blockade of ET receptors unraveled the major vasoconstrictive role of ET-1 in the pathophysiology of VOC, stressing the pivotal role of abnormal endothelial phenotype in this hemoglobinopathy and opening potential new therapeutic options.
We used immunohistochemical analysis with anti-endothelin-1 and anti-von Willebrand factor antibodies in comparing kidney biopsies from patients with systemic sclerosis and scleroderma renal crisis (n = 14); from normal kidneys (n = 5); and from patients with typical hemolytic uremic syndrome and thrombotic microangiopathy (n = 5), antiphospholipid syndrome (n = 6), diabetic nephropathy (n = 5), minimal change disease with cyclosporine toxicity (n = 5), or nephroangiosclerosis (n = 5).
Glomerular endothelin-1 staining without arteriolar staining was seen in hemolytic uremic syndrome; and isolated arteriolar staining (without glomerular staining) was seen in a number of conditions including antiphospholipid nephropathy, cyclosporine toxicity, and diabetic nephropathy.
A second course of antiviral therapy using peginterferon alpha-2b and ribavirin achieved normalization of serum transaminases and HCV-RNA, but also caused interstitial pneumonia.
We found that certain miRNAs, such as miR-196a and miR-1246, are highly enriched in pancreatic cancer exosomes.
Consistently, plasma exosome miR-196a and miR-1246 levels were significantly elevated in pancreatic cancer patients as compared to healthy subjects.
An analysis of the cancer subtypes indicated that plasma exosome miR-196a is a better indicator of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), whereas plasma exosome miR-1246 is significantly elevated in patients with intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms (IPMN).
In conclusion, we demonstrate that certain miRNA species, such as miR-196a and miR-1246, are highly enriched in pancreatic cancer exosomes and elevated in plasma exosomes of patients with localized pancreatic cancer.
A study demonstrated that expression levels of miR-1246, miR-3976, miR-4306, and miR-4644 in serum exosomes were higher in pancreatic cancer patients than these levels in healthy control participants.
The in vitro drug sensitivity of pancreatic cancer cells was altered according to the miR-1246 expression via CCNG2.
miR-1246 expression was associated with chemoresistance and CSC-like properties via CCNG2, and could predict worse prognosis in pancreatic cancer patients.
Similarly in PLP1CreER:tdT mice, PLP1 cells that co-express S100b but not RET also give rise to neurons following colitis.
The colocalization of the P2X7 receptor-immunoreactive (IR) cells was observed in the myenteric plexus with nitric oxide synthase (NOS)-, ChAT-,calbindin-, calretinin- and HuC/D-IR neurons and S100Beta-IR cells in the control, sham and colitis groups.
Ulcerative colitis patients had significantly lower serum S100B levels, while GFAP was of no diagnostic value in UC patients.
Molecules inhibiting S100B-driven enteric activation might mitigate the course of ulcerative colitis (UC).
Pentamidine exerts a marked anti-inflammatory effect in a mice model of acute colitis, likely targeting S100B activity.
We hypothesized that polymorphisms in PLIN1 and PLIN4 would be associated with bone measures in adult Caucasian participants of the Framingham Osteoporosis Study (FOS).
A complete prevention of intestinal tumors in BD6 rats was also produced not only by the DSF metabolite carbon disulfide (250 mg/kg) but also by the hepatotoxic agent carbon tetrachloride (1.5 ml/kg), which suggests that the block of DMH metabolism in rat liver is not an exclusive property of thiono-sulfur compounds.
Drp1 (Dynamin-related protein 1), a regulator of mitochondrial fission, shows neuroprotective effects on Parkinson's disease.
The role of a Parkinson's disease-associated protein-parkin, which biochemically and genetically interacts with Drp1-in mitochondrial connectivity also remains poorly understood.
These results clearly indicate that bombesin exerts morphological, adhesive, and proliferative effects on Isreco1 cells, suggesting that expression of the bombesin/GRP-R may contribute to the malignant properties of colon carcinoma cells.
Specific deletion of suppressor of cytokine signaling 3 (Socs3) in keratinocytes can cause severe skin inflammation with infiltration of immune cells.
We found that SOCS3 and SOCS1 expression was reduced in vivo, in tumor lesions of BCC and SCC, as compared to other skin inflammatory conditions such as psoriasis, despite the high number of IL-22-secreting TILs.
In the present study, we identified that suppressor of cytokine signaling-3 (SOCS3), a classical inhibitor of cytokine signaling, significantly inhibits CD8+T cell maturation, interferon-Gamma (IFN-Gamma) production and alopecia areata.
SOCS3 is downregulated in the skin of alopecia areata patients and murine autoimmune alopecia model.
Furthermore, SOCS3 treatment prevents the development of alopecia areata in the graft model.
The expression of Fas and major histocompatibility complex-1 (MHC I) is upregulated in skin from C3H/HeJ alopecia areata mice, and this increase is suppressed by SOCS3.
The SOCS3 level is negative correlation with the Fas and MHC I level in patients with alopecia areata.
These results suggest that SOCS3 treatment may be an effective strategy to treat autoimmune alopecia as well as to more generally prevent cytokine-dependent tissue destruction in inflammatory diseases.
Signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1) and STAT3, and the downstream proteins suppressor of cytokine signaling 1 (SOCS1) and SOCS3, have been implicated in psoriasis disease progression.
After the identification of thyroid H2O2 generation system (DUOX) and of its maturation factors (DUOXA), defects in DUOX2 and/or DUOXA2 were rapidly recognized as the possible cause of congenital hypothyroidism (CH) due to thyroid dyshormonogenesis.
DUOX2 mutations result in dyshormonogenetic congenital hypothyroidism (CH) that may be phenotypically heterogeneous, leading to the hypothesis that CH severity may be influenced by environmental factors (e.g., dietary iodine) and oligogenic modifiers (e.g., variants in the homologous reduced form of NAD phosphate-oxidase DUOX1).
The mutations in the dual oxidase 2 (DUOX2) and dual oxidase maturation factor 2 (DUOXA2) genes can cause congenital hypothyroidism (CH).
This study reports the pedigree with goitrous congenital hypothyroidism (GCH) due to the coexistence of heterozygous mutations in the DUOX2 and DUOXA2 genes.
Dos casos clinicos Transient congenital hypothyroidism due to biallelic defects of DUOX2 gene.
Two clinical cases Mutations in the DUOX2 gene have been described in transient and permanent congenital hypothyroidism.
Objective: To explore the TPO, DUOX2 and DUOXA2 genotypes and phenotypes of children with permanent congenital hypothyroidism(PCH) suspected dyshormonogenesis in Guangzhou, identified and treated at Guangzhou Newborn Screening Center.
#目#的#：#探#讨#疑#似#甲#状#腺#素#合#成#障#碍#性#永#久#性#先#天#性#甲#状#腺#功#能#减#低#症(congenital hypothyroidism, CH)#患#儿TPO#、DUOX2#及DUOXA2#基#因#突#变#特#点#及#其#与#临#床#表#型#的#关#系#。 #方#法#：#回#顾#分#析#广#州#市#新#生#儿#筛#查#中#心#诊#治#随#访#的9#例(#含2011-2012#年#筛#查#获#诊#的6#例)#疑#似#甲#状#腺#素#合#成#障#碍#性#永#久#性CH#患#儿#临#床#资#料, #采#用Sanger#测#序#方#法#对TPO#、DUOX2#及DUOXA2#基#因#所#有#外#显#子#及#其#相#邻#内#含#子#进#行#测#序, #分#析#基#因#型#与#临#床#表#型#的#关#系#。 #结#果#： 9#例#患#儿#中, 4#例#检#出TPO#基#因#突#变(#其#中3#例#为#双#等#位#基#因#突#变, 1#例#为#单#等#位#基#因#突#变), 4#例#检#出DUOX2#单#等#位#基#因#致#病#性#突#变, 1#例#为DUOXA2#基#因#已#知#致#病#突#变c.738C&gt;G(p.Y246X)#携#带#者#。TPO#基#因#新#突#变c.1784G&gt;C(p.R595T)#经SIFT#及PolyPhen#－2#软#件#预#测#提#示#致#病#性#可#能#性#大#。2#例TPO#双#等#位#基#因#突#变#的#青#春#期#患#儿#呈#典#型#永#久#性CH#表#型, #伴#有#甲#状#腺#肿#大#或#结#节#。6#例TPO#、DUOX2#或DUOXA2#单#等#位#基#因#突#变#者#表#现#为#不#同#程#度#的#甲#状#腺#功#能#低#下#。2011-2012#年#广#州#市433 578#名#新#生#儿CH#筛#查#确#诊156#例CH, 6#例#疑#似#甲#状#腺#素#合#成#障#碍#性#永#久#性CH, #其#中1#例#确#诊#为TPO#双#等#位#基#因#缺#陷, #其#余#均#为TPO#、DUOX2#或DUOXA2#突#变#携#带#者#。 #结#论#： TPO#及DUOX2#基#因#突#变#是#广#州#地#区#疑#似#甲#状#腺#素#合#成#障#碍#性#永#久#性CH#患#儿#较#常#见#的#分#子#发#病#基#础, TPO#、DUOX2#及DUOXA2#单#等#位#基#因#突#变#与CH#发#病#有#关, #其#临#床#表#现#具#有#显#著#异#质#性#。#广#州#地#区TPO#基#因#突#变#所#致#永#久#性CH#罕#见, #新#突#变p.R595T#致#病#性#可#能#性#大#。.
Gene variants have been reported to be associated with congenital hypothyroidism (CH), the purpose of this study was to analyze the mutation spectrum and prevalence of 12 known causative genes (TSHR, PAX8, NKX2.1, NKX2.5, FOXE1, DUOX2, TG, TPO, GLIS3, NIS, SLC26A4 and DEHAL1) in CH in China.
In the present study, we demonstrated that lncRNA-XIST was overexpressed in NSCLC tumor samples, and knockdown of lncRNA-XIST significantly decreased autophagy by regulation of ATG7 as determined by qPCR and by western blotting.
Taken together, our results show that HULC may promote ovarian carcinoma tumorigenesis by inhibiting ATG7 and inducing progression by regulating ITGB1.
Inhibition of CK2 in gp91 KO mice subjected to ischemia reperfusion did not increase brain infarction compared with TBCA-treated WT mice.
Suspected cases of mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal encephalopathy (MNGIE), myofibrillar myopathy (MFM) and distal myopathy with rimmed vacuoles (DMRV) were confirmed by molecular genetic studies examining thymidine phosphorylase, GNE, ZASP myotilin, desmin, abeta-crystalline and filamin C genes.
TDP-43-immunoreactive intracytoplasmic inclusions were seen in all cases examined of myotilinopathy, desminopathy, and sIBM, and in 1 case of inclusion body myositis with Paget disease of bone and frontotemporal degeneration (IBMPFD).
In desmin myopathy but not hereditary inclusion-body myopathy (hIBM), there is accumulation of myofibrillar proteins including desmin, myotilin, dystrophin, gelsolin, actin, and CDC kinase.
Recent findings include: the beginnings of an understanding of the role of the sarcomere in controlling muscle gene expression; the theoretical analysis of the increasing number of mutations identified in the skeletal muscle actin gene; the identification of mutations in myosin causing hereditary inclusion body myopathy and hyaline body myopathy and the identification of mutations in myotilin in myofibrillar myopathy.
We also replicated the associations of the FLG, C11orf30, TMEM232-SLC25A46, TNFRSF6B-ZGPAT, OVOL1, ACTL9 and KIF3A-IL13 loci that were previously reported in GWAS of European and Chinese individuals and a meta-analysis of GWAS for atopic dermatitis.
The tachykinins, a family of proinflammatory neuropeptides, have been implicated in the pathogenesis of pulmonary edema in some settings, including the pulmonary vascular leak associated with exposure to hypoxia.
Because CGRP potentiated the pulmonary edema induced in capsaicin and ACh, but decreased the effects of SP, we hypothesize that CGRP exerts a positive retro-control on the release of neuropeptides by these fibers but can attenuate their effects on the target cells.
On the other hand, intravenous administration of some neuropeptides that may be released from the capsaicin-sensitive nerves (e.g., substance P or calcitonin gene-related peptide) inhibited the development of pulmonary edema in vagotomized rats.
Finally, miR-1271 rescued the function of circ-ABCB10 on breast cancer cells, confirming the sponge effect of circ-ABCB10 on miR-1271.
Overall, results identified a new functional circ-ABCB10 in breast cancer tumorigenesis, and reveal the important regulatory role of circ-ABCB10 through sponging miR-1271, providing a novel insight for breast cancer pathogenesis.
Significantly higher level of miR-21 and lower level of miR-1271 expression were found in cancer tissues.
Our results suggested that reduced expression of miR-1271 may be involved in the ERG expression and that miR-1271 could be a therapeutic target for ERG-positive prostate cancer patients.
miR-1271 is a multifunctional post-translational modulator, which is involved in several diseases.
In the present study, it was hypothesized that a post-translational mechanism of miR-1271 regulates the expression of FN1 in the progression of neuroglioma.
The miR-1271 levels in glioma tissues and cell lines were assessed using reverse transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR).
The results showed that miR-1271 was downregulated in glioma tumor tissues and cell lines.
In addition, it was demonstrated that low levels of miR-1271 in patients with glioma were correlated with low survival rate.
Therefore, it was concluded that miR-1271 inhibited glioma cell growth by targeting FN1, and a low level of miR-1271 in glioma tumor tissues was associated with lower survival rates in patients with glioma.
The expression of Foxk2 may be regulated by miR-1271, which could serve as a promising therapeutic target for NSCLC.
Furthermore, DIXDC1 expression was inversely correlated with miR-1271 expression in prostate cancer tissues.
The overexpression of miR-1271 significantly inhibited proliferation, invasion and Wnt signaling in prostate cancer cells.
Targeting DIXDC1 by miR-1271 may be a promising therapeutic strategy for prostate cancer.
Since this damage is repaired by O6 -methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT), the repair enzyme represents the most important factor of drug resistance, limiting the therapy of malignant high-grade gliomas.
Here, we addressed the question whether MGMT in glioma cells is enhanced following alkylating drugs or ionizing radiation, using promoter assays.
This enhanced the immunogenicity of glioma cells in a NGK2D-dependent manner, was independent from cytotoxic or growth inhibitory effects, attenuated by O6-methylguanine-DNA-methyltransferase (MGMT) and required the DNA damage response.
Among patients affected by advanced glioblastoma or melanoma and treated with TEM, loss of tumoral O6-methylguanine DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) is correlated with improved survival.
In this study, we stimulated cervical cancer cells with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-Aza-dC) and found that this treatment inhibited cell proliferation and induced apoptosis; additionally, methylation of p16 and O-6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) was reversed, although their expression was suppressed.
In a multivariate Cox regression analyses, adjusted for inherited thrombophilia, age, sex and BMI, low levels of TGF-Beta1 [hazard ratio (HR) = 2.2, 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.1-4.3; p = 0.02] and TGF-Beta2 (HR = 2.4, 95% CI 1.2-4.7; p = 0.01) were independently associated with a higher risk of recurrent VTE.
The increased osteoclastic activity in preeclampsia may be attributed to increased RANKL induced by increased interleukin-6 (IL-6), tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), and transforming growth factor beta2 (TGF-beta2) production.
Both the enhancement of I(K,slow) and the negative inotropic effect of palmitate:BSA were reduced in the presence of the Kv1.5 selective channel blocker, diphenyl phosphine oxide-1 (DPO-1).Taken together, these results suggest that elevations in circulating saturated free fatty acids, as occurs in diabetes, can directly augment repolarizing myocardial Kv currents and impair excitation-contraction coupling.
We have previously reported that the level of leucine-rich alpha-2-glycoprotein (LRG) expression is specifically increased in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of idiopathic normal pressure hydrocephalus (INPH).
On the basis of sphingomyelinase assay in five cases of Niemann-Pick disease, three cases were classified as type IA, one as type IS and one as type IIS.
Fibroblasts from 13 patients with the clinical phenotype of type IIS, Niemann-Pick disease were evaluated for their ability to incorporate oleic acid into cholesterol esters via an LDL responsive mechanism.
To further implicate lysosomal proteins in the etiology of type IIS, Niemann-Pick disease we measured the effect of correction (conditioned) medium, and the lysosomotropic agent, NH4Cl on cholesterol ester synthesis in fibroblasts.
Neopanaxadiol (NPD), the main panaxadiol constituent of Panax ginseng C. A. Meyer (Araliaceae), has been regarded as the active component for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease.
Neopanaxadiol (NPD) is one of the major ginsenosides in Panax ginseng C. A. Meyer (Araliaceae) that has been suggested to be a drug candidate against Alzheimer's disease.
We covered an introduction to sphingomyelinases and its enzymatic product ceramide, in membrane domains or lipid rafts and the nucleus; followed by crosstalk between sphingomyelinase and cytosolic phospholipase A2 (cPLA2) catalysed products including arachidonic acid, functions of acid sphingomyelinase (aSMase) and neutral sphingomyelinase (N-SMase) in neurons, neuronal progenitor cells, glial cells, and brain endothelial cells; alterations in acid and N-SMases in Niemann Pick Disease Type A, major depression, Alzheimer's disease, cerebral ischemia, and pain; and recent developments in identification of inhibitors to sphingomyelinases.
These entities named FIASMAs (Functional Inhibitors of Acid SphingoMyelinAse), therefore, can be potentially used to treat diseases associated with enhanced activity of ASM, such as Alzheimer's disease, major depression, radiation- and chemotherapy-induced apoptosis and endotoxic shock syndrome.
Aim: The aim of this study was to investigate the effect and underlying signaling mechanisms of metformin on apoptosis and Cx43 expression in H9c2 cells presenting with hyperglycemia conditions.
Interestingly, metformin attenuated hyperglycemia-increased apoptosis and restored Cx43 expression.
Conclusion: Administration metformin can protect the H9c2 cells against hyperglycemia-induced apoptosis and Cx43 down-regulation, in part, mediated through the induction of autophagy pathway.
However, it remains to be elucidated whether resveratrol treatment may attenuate the hyperglycemia-induced remodeling of Cx43 and apoptosis through the regulation of autophagy.
In conclusion, administration resveratrol may protect H9c2 cells against hyperglycemia-induced Cx43 upregulation and apoptosis, which may be mediated through the induction of the autophagy signaling pathway.
The objective of this study was to investigate the frequency of autoantibodies to hydroxymethylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase (HMGCR) in systemic sclerosis (SSc) and associations with inflammatory myositis and statin exposure.This was a cross-sectional, multicenter study of 306 subjects from the Canadian Scleroderma Research Group cohort who had complete data on statin exposure and serology for anti-HMGCR antibodies assayed by an addressable laser bead immunoassay (ALBIA).
IMNM may be associated with myositis-specific autoantibodies (i.e., anti-SRP and anti-HMGCR) and malignancy, in association with viral infections (HIV or hepatitis C), or in relation to other connective tissue diseases (i.e., scleroderma).
3-Hydroxy-3-methyl-glutaryl-CoA reductase inhibitors, endothelin receptor antagonists and phosphodiesterase type V inhibitor have been shown to be useful to treat the vascular manifestations associated with systemic sclerosis.
It has been shown that asymmetric dimethylarginine (ADMA), carbonyl groups, catalase (CAT) and neurokinin A (NKA) are actively involved in neuronal processes such as depression and posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD).
Here, we examined the serotonin and substance P/neurokinin-1 (SP/NK1) systems individually as well as their overlapping expression in 16 patients with posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and 16 healthy controls.
Pregabalin is a new generation antiepileptic that exerts its effect by decreasing the release of such neurotransmitters as glutamate, noradrenaline, and substance P. Pregabalin can be prescribed in Turkey at 150-600 mg to treat neuropathic pain, generalized anxiety disorder, and fibromyalgia, and as concomitant therapy in adult patients with partial epilepsy.
The novel E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase neural precursor cell-expressed developmentally downregulated protein 4 (NEDD4) has been implicated as a crucial factor promoting the tumorigenesis of several types of cancer.
The present study investigated the oncogenic role of NEDD4 in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) by targeted small interfering RNA silencing of the tumor suppressor phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN).
The neural precursor cell expressed developmentally downregulated protein 4 (NEDD4) plays a pivotal oncogenic role in various types of human cancers.
However, the function of NEDD4 in bladder cancer has not been fully investigated.
In the present study, we aim to explore whether NEDD4 governs cell proliferation, apoptosis, migration, and invasion in bladder cancer cells.
Our results showed that downregulation of NEDD4 suppressed cell proliferation in bladder cancer cells.
Consistently, upregulation of NEDD4 promoted cell migration and invasion in bladder cancer cells.
Mechanically, our Western blotting results revealed that downregulation of NEDD4 activated PTEN and inhibited Notch-1 expression, whereas upregulation of NEDD4 reduced PTEN level and increased Notch-1 level in bladder cancer cells.
Our findings indicated that NEDD4 exerts its oncogenic function partly due to regulation of PTEN and Notch-1 in bladder cancer cells.
These results further revealed that targeting NEDD4 could be a useful approach for the treatment of bladder cancer.
Our results demonstrate that NEDD4 may promote the acquired resistance of non-small-cell lung cancer cells to erlotinib by decreasing phosphatase and tensin homolog deleted on chromosome 10 protein expression.
Targeted decrease in NEDD4 expression may be a potential therapeutic strategy for tyrosine kinase inhibitor-resistant non-small-cell lung cancer.
Stability of NEDD4-1, in turn, is tightly controlled by a 34 kDa oncoprotein, p34SEI-1 and it regulates PTEN degradation and activates PI3K/AKT pathway, resulting in cancer metastasis.
Our data will provide insights into the molecular mechanism of NEDD4-1 and p34SEI-1 interaction, which will be directly used for drug design which inhibits the molecular interaction involved in different cancer signaling.
The E3 ubiquitin ligase NEDD4, neural precursor cell expressed developmentally downregulated protein 4, is frequently overexpressed in various cancers.
However, whether curcumin regulates NEDD4 expression has not been described in human cancers.
The neural precursor cell expressed developmentally down-regulated protein 4 (NEDD4) is an E3 HECT ubiquitin ligase and is frequently over-expressed in various cancers.
We investigated the expression of NEDD4 and the tumor suppressor PTEN in normal immortalized human pancreatic duct epithelial cell line and pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PDAC) cell lines.
Finally, we determined the mechanism behind differential NEDD4 protein expression in pancreatic cancer.
Our findings indicate that NEDD4 potentially plays a critical role in activating the PI3K/AKT signaling pathway by negatively regulating PTEN levels in PDAC cells, which promotes pancreatic cancer cell proliferation and metastasis.
In addition, genes encoding NALCN, NLF- 1, UNC-79, and UNC-80 proteins may be susceptibility loci for several diseases including bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, Alzheimer's disease, autism, epilepsy, alcoholism, cardiac diseases and cancer.
The peripheral neutrophil-monocyte/lymphocyte ratio (NMLR) and intratumoral CD16/CD8 ratio (iMLR) may have prognostic value in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) patients after curative resection.
Codrituzumab, a humanized monoclonal antibody against Glypican-3 (GPC3) that is expressed in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), interacts with CD16/FcGammaRIIIa and triggers antibody-dependent cytotoxicity.
Earlier research demonstrated a dramatic reduction in the frequency of peripheral blood CD56dimCD16+ NK subsets in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) patients compared with healthy subjects.
In contrast with the healthy controls, the frequency of peripheral NK cells in hepatocellular carcinoma patients was decreased (12.19%+/-10.85% vs 24.01%+/-8.78%, u = 4.01, probability value less than 0.01), while the frequency of CD56(bright)CD16(neg) NK cells was increased (0.62%+/-0.39% vs 0.48%+/-0.28%, u = 1.96, probability value less than 0.05), and the frequency of CD56(dim)CD16(pos) NK cells was significantly decreased (11.59%+/-7.49% vs 22.66%+/-8.84%, u = 3.92, probability value less than 0.01).
However, the expression and functions of EphB2 in cervical cancer remain unknown.
In this study, we performed immunohistochemistry in clinical cervical specimens and found that EphB2 was overexpressed in the cervical cancer specimens, and its expression correlated with cancer progression.
We overexpressed EphB2 in HeLa cells and silenced EphB2 in cervical cancer (C33A) cells, which expressed low and high levels of EphB2, respectively.
In addition, we investigated the intracellular signaling pathways in cervical cancer and found that R-Ras expression correlated positively with EphB2 in clinical samples, and its activity was regulated by EphB2 in cervical cancer.
These findings demonstrate that EphB2 plays an important role in cervical cancer progression by orchestrating an EMT program through R-Ras activation.
In this study, we analyzed mutations in 11 cancer-related genes with mononucleotide repeats susceptible to MSI in a coding region [hMSH3 (A8), hMSH6 (C8), TGF-beta RII (A10), MBD4 (A10), BAX (G8), PTEN (A6 in exon 7), HDAC2 (A9), EPHB2 (A9), Caspase-5 (A10), TCF-4 (A9) and Axin2 (G7)] in 22 patients with MSI-H sporadic endometrial cancer.
These results suggest a functional role for EPHB2 in gastric tumor progression, and emphasize the differences between the tumorigenic processes in MSI gastrointestinal and endometrial cancer.
To analyze expressions of the EphB2 and EphB4 receptors in ovarian carcinomas and explore their clinicopathological correlations and prognostic value.
Ovarian carcinoma patients with age elder than 60 years had higher EphB2 expression than younger patients.
These studies suggest that EphB2 and B4 receptors are of prognostic value and EphB4 receptor may be an independent predictor of chemotherapy response in ovarian cancer patients.
We reviewed our radiotherapy practise and compared patients with early stage cervical cancer who had surgery and adjuvant radiotherapy (ART) to those that had definitive radiotherapy (DRT).
Aberrant infiltration of inflammatory cells (CD4, CD8, CD68, S100) was detected in pterygium, while lower densities were found in pinguecula and conjunctiva.
Two of these markers were cell surface carbonic anhydrase isozymes (CAIX and/or CAXII) and were validated for protein expression by immunohistochemistry of patient tissue samples on a breast cancer tissue microarray containing 47 normal breast tissue samples, 42 ductal carcinoma in situ, 43 invasive ductal carcinomas without metastasis, 46 invasive ductal carcinomas with metastasis, and 49 lymph node macrometastases of breast carcinoma.
However, on high-fat diet Gdf3-/- mice were resistant to the obesity that normally develops in wild-type mice.
Herein we investigate the physiological and molecular mechanisms that underlie this protection from diet-induced obesity and demonstrate that GDF3 deficiency selectively affects white adipose through its influence on basal metabolic rates.
In this study, we show that Gdf3(-/-) mutant mice accumulate less adipose tissue than WT animals and show partial resistance to high-fat diet-induced obesity despite similar food intake.
In agreement with a role for ALK7 in GDF3 signaling in vivo, mutant mice lacking ALK7 also showed reduced fat accumulation and partial resistance to diet-induced obesity.
However, GDF-3 was not involved in blood glucose homeostasis or insulin resistance, a condition associated with obesity.
Purported BS2 cases may be divided into: (1) Bardet-Biedl syndrome with fortuitous coloboma or aniridia, (2) BS2 sensu stricto, a recessively inherited syndrome of sexual infantilism, short stature, coloboma, and preaxial polydactyly without obesity, only known from the original report, (3) a "new" dominantly inherited form of colobomatous microphthalmia occasionally associated with obesity, hypogonadism, and mental retardation, to which our observations belong.
An increasing number of epileptic syndromes belongs to this group of rare disorders: Autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy is caused by mutations in a neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (affected genes: CHRNA4, CHRNB2), benign familial neonatal convulsions by mutations in potassium channels constituting the M-current (KCNQ2, KCNQ3), generalized epilepsy with febrile seizures plus by mutations in subunits of the voltage-gated sodium channel or the GABA(A) receptor (SCN1B, SCN1A, GABRG2), and episodic ataxia type 1-which is associated with epilepsy in a few patients--by mutations within another voltage-gated potassium channel (KCNA1).
Autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy is caused by mutations in CHRNA4, benign familial neonatal convulsions by mutations in KCNQ2 and KCNQ3, and generalised epilepsy with febrile seizures plus by mutations in SCN1B.
CBG deficiency caused a fall of hepatic 11Beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2 expression and an increase in epidymal adipose tissue, particularly in HL mice.
In conclusion, individuals with CBG deficiency, whether genetically or environmentally-induced, are vulnerable to acute stress but do not have their abnormal psychoneuroendocrine phenotype further affected by chronic stress.
Assess the implications of a CBG deficiency on pregnancy outcomes.
Given that CBG deficiency is known to markedly impact on CORT clearance from plasma, our current article demonstrates that Cbg-/- insensitivity in memory retrieval after stress results from the blunted CORT response due to increased CORT clearance.
The only biochemical feature to distinguish the symptomatic subject was increased cortisol pulsatility, and we suggest that this may influence glucocorticoid signaling and contribute to symptoms previously associated with CBG deficiency.
We have investigated the effect of partial or total transcortin deficiency using transcortin knockout mice on hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal axis functioning and regulation as well as on behaviors linked to anxiety and depression traits in animals.
We show that CBG deficiency in mice results in markedly reduced total circulating corticosterone at rest and in response to stress.
Thus, transcortin deficiency leads to insufficient glucocorticoid signaling and altered behavioral responses after stress.
The three reported null homozygotes demonstrate that complete CBG deficiency is not lethal, although it may be associated with hypotension and fatigue.
Then the dissection of some CBG physiological roles in an animal model of genetic CBG deficiency is reported.
To the best of our knowledge, this case represents the first de novo mutation reported for corticosteroid-binding globulin deficiency, implicating a pathogenic role of variants of SERPINA6 in some cases of muscle fatigue.
However little is known about the distribution of free cortisol in plasma where CBG is inactivated or in congenital CBG deficiency.
However, a decreased expression of the mitochondrial protein quality control proteases Lon and ClpP, both at the RNA and protein level, was demonstrated in SPG13 patient cells.
We performed a case-control study to evaluate the association between polymorphisms in CYP19A1 rs2899470, GSTM1, GSTT1, and GSTP1 rs1695 and the development of endometriosis in a Chinese population.
However, GSTM1, GSTT1, and GSTP1 rs1695 polymorphisms did not affect the pathogenesis of endometriosis.
We examined the associations of GSTM1 and GSTT1 null genotypes and GSTP1 313 A/G polymorphisms with endometriosis in an Iranian population.
Our results showed that GSTM1 and GSTP1 polymorphisms may be associated with susceptibility of endometriosis in Iranian women.
In view of the controversies surrounding the association of glutathione S-transferases (GST) P1 with endometriosis, a meta-analysis of GSTP1 -313A/G polymorphism with endometriosis risk was performed.
The association between GSTP1 -313A/G polymorphism and endometriosis risk was pooled by odds ratios (ORs) together with their 95% confidence intervals (95% CIs).
We found that GSTP1-313A/G polymorphism was not associated with endometriosis risk in the overall population (A vs. G: OR=1.02, 95% CI=0.97-1.07, P=0.511; AA vs. GG: OR=1.02, 95% CI=0.98-1.06, P=0.359; GA vs. GG: OR=1.03, 95% CI=0.98-1.08, P=0.299; AA vs. OR=1.01, 95% CI=0.96-1.07, P=0.621; AA/GA vs. GG: OR=1.00, 95% CI=0.97-1.03, P=0.972).
GSTP1 -313A/G polymorphism may not be associated with endometriosis risk, while the observed increase in risk of endometriosis may be due to small-study bias.
To investigate the association of polymorphisms of arylhydrocarbon receptor (AhR)-1661G/A with glutathione S-transferase pi (GSTP1) -313A/G and the susceptibility to endometriosis in southern Han Chinese.
The numbers of combined genotypes AhR -1661G/A and GSTP1 -313A/G were 120 patients with AG + AA, 64 patients with AG + AG, 8 patients with AG + GG, 109 patients with GG + AA, 84 patients with GG + AG, 4 patients with GG + GG, 31 patients with AA + AA, 10 patients with AA + AG, 1 patient with AA + GG at endometriosis group and 131 patients with AG + AA, 68 patients with AG + AG, 6 patients with AG + GG, 157 patients with GG + AA, 66 patients with GG + AG, 4 patients with GG + GG, 35 patients with AA + AA, 20 patients with AA + AG, 3 patients with AA + GG at endometriosis group.
The combined genotype GG + AG [from AhR -1661G/A (GG) and GSTP1 -313A/G (AG)] might be related with susceptibility to endometriosis.
The GSTP1 wild-type genotype in the presence of medium-high blood levels of PCB153, total PCBs, or of high levels of PCB180 significantly increased the risk of endometriosis, suggesting a multiplicative interaction.
To investigate whether the glutathione-S-transferase P1 (GSTP1) exon 5 polymorphism is associated with susceptibility to advanced stage endometriosis in Korean women.
The genotype distribution of the GSTP1 exon 5 polymorphism in the endometriosis group was not significantly different from that of the control group (AA/AG/GG rates were 64.2%/32.7%/3.1% and 65.2%/31.7%/3.0% for the endometriosis and control groups, respectively, P = 0.977).
These findings suggest that the GSTP1 exon 5 polymorphism is not a major determinant of the development of advanced stage endometriosis in the Korean population.
With the evolvement of DNA sequencing, many genes have been associated with psoriasis vulgaris and psoriatic arthritis, which included MHC, TNF, LCE, IL23R, IL12B, TRAF3IP2 and TNFAIP3, though some, such as MHC, IL-13 and PTPN22, have been specifically associated with psoriatic arthritis.
We discovered three significant associations at rs6679677 on 1p13.2 (P=6.15x10-5 , OR=5.07), rs16861329 on 3q27.3 (P=2.02x10-4 , OR=0.87) and rs849135 on 7p15.1 (P=6.59x10-9 , OR=1.78), which suggested PTPN22, ST6GAL1 and JAZF1 as novel susceptibility genes for psoriasis in Chinese population.
We found genome-wide significant association to rs2476601, mapping to PTPN22 (p=1.49x10(-9), OR=1.32), but no evidence for association in the psoriasis cohort (p=0.34) and the effect estimates were significantly different between PsA and psoriasis (p=3.2x10(-4)).
For the first time, we report genome-wide significant association of PTPN22 (rs2476601) to PsA susceptibility, but no evidence for association to psoriasis.
A polymorphism of the PTPN22 gene has been found to be associated with chronic urticaria (CU).
By contrast, PTPN22 C1858T showed a negligible association with systemic sclerosis, celiac disease, multiple sclerosis, psoriasis, ankylosing spondylitis, pemphigus vulgaris, ulcerative colitis, primary sclerosing cholangitis, primary biliary cirrhosis, Crohn's disease and acute anterior uveitis.
Previous studies of the association between psoriasis and PTPN22 C1858T (rs2476601), a gain of function variant associated with a stronger inhibitory effect of T-lymphocytes, have produced inconsistent results.
The purpose of the current study is to evaluate the association between PTPN22 C1858T and psoriasis using meta-analysis to: (1) have a sufficient sample size for detecting a weak association; and (2) to explore the heterogeneity between studies.
A non-significantly positive association between psoriasis and the PTPN22 T1858 was observed [summary allelic odds ratio (OR) = 1.15, 95 % confidence interval (CI): 1.00-1.33] and the association appears stronger among subjects with psoriatic arthritis (summary allelic OR = 1.23, 95 % CI: 1.00-1.52).
A null association between PTPN22 T1858 and early-onset psoriasis was observed (summary allelic OR = 1.08, 95 % CI: 0.92-1.28).
The current analysis showed a non-significantly positive association between psoriasis and the PTPN22 T1858 allele, and the association appeared stronger among subjects with psoriatic arthritis.
Twenty-five patients (61%) had no to mild mitral regurgitation during anastomosis of the LCX territory (M-MR group) and 16 patients (39%) had moderate to severe mitral regurgitation during anastomosis of the LCX territory (S-MR group).
We used immunohistochemistry to quantitate liver expression of RANKL, its receptor (RANK), and importantly the decoy receptor osteoprotegerin (OPG), including a total of 122 liver samples (PBC = 37, primary sclerosing cholangitis = 20, autoimmune hepatitis = 26, chronic hepatitis B = 32 and unaffected controls = 7).
Autoantibodies neutralising the effect of the bone regulatory cytokine osteoprotegerin (OPG) have been described in a patient with severe osteoporosis and coeliac disease.
To investigate risk factors for low bone mineral density (BMD) in celiac disease (CD) patients, focusing on circulating autoantibodies against osteoprotegerin (OPG).
Autoantibodies against osteoprotegerin, which block the inhibitory effect of osteoprotegerin on signaling by the receptor activator of nuclear factor (NF)-kappaB (RANK), were identified in a man with celiac disease who presented with severe osteoporosis and high bone turnover.
Autoantibodies against osteoprotegerin were detected in three additional patients with celiac disease.
Such autoantibodies may be associated with the development of high-turnover osteoporosis, but whether autoantibodies against osteoprotegerin commonly contribute to the pathogenesis of osteoporosis in patients with celiac disease remains to be determined.
Next, we combined Akti-1/2 with metformin, a widely-prescribed drug for treating type 2 diabetes, which was reported to down-regulate OCT4 expression.
This study applied the immunohistochemistry technique SP method In fibroadenoma, ductal carcinoma in situ and invasive ductal carcinoma of the breast 4 groups, the positive immunostaining rate of nm23, MMP-2 and TIMP-2 have significant difference among 4 groups (p &lt; 0.05).
MMP-2 in the breast ductal carcinoma in situ appears of high expression and this suggested that the positive expression of this onco-proteins was the early incident in the genetic course of the breast cancer The unite detection of nm23, MMP-2 and TIMP-2 expression would contribute to the early diagnosis and prognostic assessment of the carcinoma of the breast.
Expression of nm23-H1 was evident in 9/25 (36%) CIN I, 13/28 (46%) CIN II, 22/28 (78.5%) CIN III and 17/25 (68%) infiltrating carcinoma biopsies.
The cases that had low-grade squamous dysplasia of the cervix (CIN I-II) (N = 7; 100%) also displayed moderate to strong nm23-H1 immunoreactivity in the epithelium except for the basal layer (CIN I) or the lower two-thirds of the epithelium (CIN II).
nm23-H1 Immunoreactivity was either absent or was significantly reduced in all of the high-grade CIN (CIN III) cases (N = 7; 100%) in which only the non-dysplastic superficial third of the squamous epithelium displayed nm23-H1 immunolabeling.
The purpose of this retrospective study was to investigate the relationship of Nm23 protein expression with 1) histology in ductal breast carcinoma in situ and 2) the variables considered to be the major prognostic indicators in invasive breast carcinoma.
Nm23 negativity distinguished comedo ductal carcinoma in situ from the other histological types, a finding consistent with the fact that comedo histology is known to have a higher likelihood of becoming invasive and of having higher cell proliferation rates and higher expression of growth factor (c-erb B2) receptor.
Nm23-negative tumor cells have been observed in comedo ductal carcinoma in situ lesions in two independent studies, indicating that decreases in nm23 expression begin prior to actual histologically identifiable invasion.
Among the cases of CIS with no invasion, LCIS and comedo DCIS expressed more nm23 than noncomedo DCIS (P &lt; or = 0.03).
NaF-induced vasocontraction at pCa 7.0 was inhibited by pretreatment with Rho kinase inhibitors H1152 or Y27632 but not with a MLCK inhibitor ML-7 or a PKC inhibitor Ro31-8220.
The carboxy-terminal domains of gB and gM directed a predominantly intracellular localization of gDB and gDM, while full-length gD and a tail-less gD mutant (gDc) were preferentially expressed on the cell surface.
SALL4 is aberrantly expressed in human myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) and acute myeloid leukemia (AML).
Constitutive expression of SALL4 transgene readily induces acute myeloid leukemia (AML) development in mice.
Sal-like protein 4 (SALL4) is a transcription factor that exists in two splice isoforms, SALL4a and SALL4b, and regulates transcription in embryonic stem cells, hematopoiesis, and acute myeloid leukemia.
Constitutive overexpression of SALL4 in mice induces acute myeloid leukemia.
Lastly, we found that SALL4 expression is variable in acute myeloid leukemia, ranging from no expression to levels comparable to embryonic stem cells.
These results show that SALL4 isoforms contribute to only a subset of acute myeloid leukemia and that overexpression of SALL4 isoforms impairs hematopoiesis through repression of BMI1.
SALL4 transgenic mice develop MDS prior to acute myeloid leukemia (AML) transformation.
The embryonic self-renewal factor SALL4 has been implicated in the development of human acute myeloid leukemia (AML).
The aim of this study was to investigate the expression level of the SALL4 gene and its clinical significance in patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and chronic myeloid leukemia (CML).
The aim was therefore to investigate the variation of GnRH-R expression with prostate tumour progression using Dunning rat adenocarcinoma sublines representing different prostate tumour grades.
Four selected patients older than 70 years of age with advanced adenocarcinoma of the prostate who were treated with a depot injection of LHRH and antiandrogen therapy had their treatment discontinued.
In the first procedure, electroanatomic mapping (EAM) revealed a total of 139 ATs in 105 patients, including 88 cavotricuspid isthmus dependent atrial flutters (IDAFs), 5 mitral annulus reentrant tachycardias (MARTs), 44 intra-atrial reentrant tachycardias (IARTs) and 2 focal ATs (FATs).
A total of 23 ATs were identified in redo procedures including 4 IDAFs, 2 MARTs, 12 IARTs and 5 FATs.
Also in FATs, the RAFW was the most common site (77.8%) of the ectopic focus.
Ninety per cent of FATs were successfully ablated.
Resistin is a cytokine related with inflammation and ischemic heart disease.
Our previous study has shown higher levels of serum Resistin in KD patients with coronary aneurysm.
In this study, we examined the association of the RETN SNPs in - 420 and + 299 in patients with idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy (IDCM).
Bi-DOCS were associated with genes related to pancreas development and beta-cell function, including transcription factors mutated in monogenic diabetes (PDX1, NKX2-2, HNF1A; FDR &lt; 0.05).
We aimed to characterize mosaic populations of pancreatic islet cells from patients with atypical congenital hyperinsulinism in infancy (CHI-A) and the expression profile of NKX2.2, a key transcription factor expressed in Beta-cells but suppressed in Delta-cells in the mature pancreas.
The expression of early transcription factors (TF), including Ngn3, FoxA1 and Nkx2.2, was not compromised by chronic hyperglycemia.
Since cell proliferation has a strong requirement for iron, cancer cells express high levels of transferrin receptors (TfnR), making its ligand, transferrin (Tfn), of great interest as a delivery agent for therapeutics.
There have been significant advances in our understanding of how TFIIIB-mediated transcription is deregulated in a variety of cancers.
RESULTS: Using breast, cervical, prostate and glioblastoma cancer cells we demonstrate: (1) PTEN inhibition of gene external RNA pol III transcription is cell type specific, (2) PTEN-mediated inhibition of U6 transcription occurs via the C2 lipid-binding domain and (3) PTEN repression of U6 transcription occurs, at least in part, through the TFIIIB subunit BRF2.
In addition, PE cells have elevated levels of the retinoblastoma protein RB, which is known to bind and repress TFIIIB.
We found that c-Fos expression in the mitochondria of neuroblastoma Neuro2a cells was augmented by oxygen and glucose deprivation (OGD), which is a common in vitro model for brain ischemia.
Because impaired prefrontal cortical Gamma-oscillations are thought to underlie the cognitive impairments in schizophrenia, the authors investigated whether KCNS3 mRNA levels are altered in the prefrontal cortex of schizophrenia subjects.
KCNS3 mRNA expression was evaluated by in situ hybridization in 22 matched pairs of schizophrenia and comparison subjects and by microarray analyses of pooled samples of individually dissected neurons that were labeled with Vicia villosa agglutinin (VVA), a parvalbumin neuron-selective marker, in a separate cohort of 14 pairs.
By in situ hybridization, KCNS3 mRNA levels were 23% lower in schizophrenia subjects.
By microarray, KCNS3 mRNA levels were lower by 40% in VVA-labeled neurons from schizophrenia subjects.
These findings reveal lower KCNS3 expression in prefrontal cortical parvalbumin neurons in schizophrenia, providing a molecular basis for compromised detection of coincident synaptic inputs to parvalbumin neurons that could contribute to altered Gamma-oscillations and impaired cognition in schizophrenia.
KCNS3 and LHX6 might be useful for characterizing cell-type specific molecular alterations of cortical GABA neurotransmission and for the development of novel treatments targeting PV and/or SST neurons in schizophrenia.
TYRO3, AXL, and MERTK (TAM) receptors are a family of receptor tyrosine kinases that maintain homeostasis through the clearance of apoptotic cells, and when defective, contribute to chronic inflammatory and autoimmune diseases such as atherosclerosis, multiple sclerosis, systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, and Crohn's disease.
We analyzed the expression and clinical relevance of Axl on the surface of CD14+ monocytes/macrophages (mAxl, membrane Axl) and in the plasma (sAxl, soluble Axl) from patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).
Strong correlations with disease activity indices (Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Disease Activity Index (SLEDAI), complement reduction, titer of circulating anti-dsDNA) were found for sMER, not for sAXL.
To clarify the biological role of the 90K/Mac-2BP glycoprotein, we evaluated the ability of two MAbs SP-2 and 1A4.22, to reveal this glycoprotein in both serum and tissue from hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) patients.
The IC50 (95 % confidence limits) of curcin on SGC-7901, Sp2/0, and human hepatoma was 0.23 (0.15-0.32) mg/L, 0.66 (0.35-0.97) mg/L, 3.16 (2.74-3.58) mg/L, respectively.
The purpose of this study was to evaluate histologic criteria that may differentiate CTD-UIP from I-UIP, including fibroblastic foci (FFs), lymphoid aggregates (LAs), and the presence of nonspecific interstitial pneumonia pattern.
In the work presented here, we used 16S rRNA Illumina sequencing to determine whether a connection exists between oral nitrate-reducing bacteria, nitrates for cardiovascular disease, and migraines, which are a common side effect of nitrate medications (U. Thadani and T. Rodgers, Expert Opin Drug Saf 5:667-674, 2006, http://dx.doi.org/10.1517/14740338.5.5.667).
Safinamide is being developed in phase III for treatment of Parkinson's disease, whereas the development in epilepsy relates to the industrial strategy of the company.
Duplicate samples from the same animals were also examined by electron microscopy for the presence of abnormal brain fibrils (scrapie-associated fibrils; SAFs).
A statistical comparison was made between the results of the statutory neurohistopathological method for the post mortem diagnosis of bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) and the detection of abnormal brain fibrils (SAF).
The histopathological diagnosis of BSE, validated on a single section of the medulla for the statutory diagnosis of large numbers of cases, is supplemented where necessary by fibril (SAF) examination which performs similarly to the histological diagnosis in the majority of cases.
Using hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) as a cancer model, we show that hypoxia, through stabilization of hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1), induces ectoenzyme, ectonucleoside triphosphate diphosphohydrolase 2 (ENTPD2/CD39L1), in cancer cells, causing its overexpression in HCC clinical specimens.
Here, the authors show that in hepatocellular carcinoma, hypoxia induces the expression of ENTPD2 on cancer cells leading to elevated extracellular 5'-AMP, which in turn promote the maintenance of MDSCs by preventing their differentiation.
Ecto-ATPase gene expression is increased in a human hepatoma whereas it is undetectable in the normal liver.
Those patterns, together with results of enzyme assays, Western blotting, or semiquantitative RT-PCR show that NTPDase2 is the main ectonucleotidase for murine and human hepatoma cells, NTPDase3 for chick hepatocytes and LMH cells, and an E-NPP enzyme for chick cardiac myocytes.
Evidence for NTPDase2 expression was lacking in all cells except the mouse and human hepatoma cells.
TCDD increased expression of the NTPDase2 gene but only in the mouse and not in the human hepatoma cells.
The failure of TCDD to increase ATP metabolism in HUVEC, chick LMH cells, hepatocytes, and cardiac myocytes can be attributed to their lack of NTPDase2 expression, while the increase in ATP metabolism by TCDD in the mouse but not the human hepatoma cells can be explained by differences in TCDD effects on mouse and human hepatoma NTPDase2 gene expression.
Bile acid transport activity and ecto-ATPase expression were analyzed in primary rat hepatocytes, rat hepatoma HTC cells, and specially adapted HTC (HTC-R) cells using plasma membrane vesicles and Northern blot, slot blot, ribonuclease protection assay, and Western blot analyses.
Using this cDNA as a probe to clone the mercurial-insensitive ectoATPase (MI-ectoATPase) of human hepatoma Li-7A cells, the cDNA obtained was that of CEA which has no ATPase activity.
A mercurial-insensitive ectoATPase, which was more active with CaATP than with MgATP, was induced when human hepatoma (Li-7A) cells were cultured in the presence of epidermal growth factor (EGF) and cholera toxin.
Grade 1-2 acneiform skin rash, paronychia, and desquamation, and grade 2-3 dry skin and pruritis were observed.
Our data show that a strong association exists between the presence of DSP and illness duration, HbA1(c), smoking, thereby indicating that cessation of smoking and near normal glycemic control would be additional precautions to delay the beginning or progression of polyneuropathy.
We investigated the relationship between blood levels of HbA1, an indicator of diabetic control, and the polyneuropathy index (PNI), an indicator of diabetic polyneuropathy.
However, since there were many patients whose HbA1 levels were not correlated with the reduction in PNI, there may be some unknown factors, possibly genetic, that play a role in the progression of polyneuropathy in diabetic patients.
Therefore, serum miR-200c and miR-371-5p have ability as the useful diagnostic biomarkers and therapeutic targets in Kawasaki disease.
The association between genetic variation in the SSTR1-MIPOL1 and TSLP-SLC25A46 loci and age at onset is the first report of age at onset effects in allergic rhinitis.
Focusing on invasive ductal breast cancer (IDC), we have found dysregulated expression in tumor samples of several microRNAs, including the miR-200 family, along progression from primary tumors to distant metastases, further reflected in higher blood levels of miR-200b and miR-7 in IDC patients with regional or distant metastases relative to patients with primary node-negative tumors.
Our data suggest that miR-200b regulates EMT of chemo-resistant breast cancer cells by targeting FN1.
miR-200b-based therapy may be an effective strategy in treating advanced breast cancer patients.
Here, we report for the first time that the suppression of ERBeta in MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells leads to significant changes in the expression profiles of specific microRNAs, including miR-10b, miR-200b and miR-145.
We found that miR-200b level was decreased, whereas that of FUT4 was increased in tissues and serum of breast cancer compared with that in the control by real-time PCR, western blotting and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.
The results also showed that miR-200b suppressed FUT4 expression and inhibited tumor growth and metastasis in MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells, as well as in the xenografted tumor tissues and metastatic lung tissues.
In conclusion, the study highlights that FUT4 could apply as a novel target for miR-200b that suppress the proliferation and metastasis of breast cancer cells by reducing Alfa1,3-fucosylation and LeY biosynthesis of glycoproteins.
miR-200b and FUT4 are potential diagnostic and therapeutic targets for breast cancer.
We isolated cells from the primary mammary tumor, the circulation, and metastatic lesions in the lung in TA2 mice and found that the long noncoding RNA (lncRNA) H19 mediated EMT and MET by differentially acting as a sponge for the microRNAs miR-200b/c and let-7b.
MicroRNA-200b (miR-200b) is a tumor suppressor in multiple tumor types, including gastric cancer, breast cancer, ovarian cancer and glioma.
The aim of this study was to investigate the role of miR-222, miR-29a, miR-34a, miR-130a, miR-90b, miR-200b, miR-452, miR-197, miR-138, miR-210, miR-423, miR-4298, miR-4644, miR-139, miR-1246, miR-1268a, miR-140, miR-149, miR-3178, miR-3613, miR-4258, miR-574, miR-671, miR-6780b, miR-7107, miR-744 and miR-7847 linked to drug resistance in breast cancer formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissues and the association of prognosis with miRNAs, thus providing effective targets in chemotherapy, as well as potential biomarkers for guiding effective treatments of breast cancer.
The study was performed in group of 158 patients (145 women, 13 men) operated because of non-toxic goitre --115 patients--(SNN) and toxic--43 patients--(SNT).
DS treatment neither caused adverse events, particularly bleeding or thrombocytopenia, nor induced significant changes in serum albumin, total bilirubin, prothrombin time, and residual liver function.
All 5 patients had varying severities of leukopenia, anemia, thrombocytopenia, prolonged prothrombin time, and hypofibrinogenemia.
Accumulating evidence has demonstrated that the Sigma-1 receptor (Sigma-1R) possesses neuroprotective effects and is a potential novel therapeutic target for certain psychiatric diseases, including post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) accompanied with anxiety disorder.
Molecular genetic studies point to potential risk loci of psychotic depression shared with schizoaffective disorder (1q42, 22q11, 19p13), depression, bipolar disorder, and schizophrenia (6p, 8p22, 10p13-12, 10p14, 13q13-14, 13q32, 18p, 22q11-13) and several vulnerability genes possibly contributing to an increased risk of psychotic symptoms in depression (eg, BDNF, DBH, DTNBP1, DRD2, DRD4, GSK-3beta, MAO-A).
In this 26-week, prospective, open-label, double-blind, parallel-group study, 90 patients with schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder, or schizophreniform disorder were recruited and divided into two groups according to their DRD2 genotype (A1A1, n=14; A1A2+A2A2, n=76).
We tested whether allelic variation at DRD2 and five surrounding loci cosegregated with schizophrenia in 112 small- to moderate-size Irish families containing two or more members affected with schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder, defined by DSM-III-R.
Therefore, niacin was effective against iodoacetamide-induced colitis through ameliorating pathologic angiogenesis and inflammatory changes in a GPR109A-dependent manner.
Niacin, a pharmacological Gpr109a agonist, suppressed colitis and colon cancer in a Gpr109a-dependent manner.
The gene fragment encoding 19 kDa antigen and the upstream control element (19-ss) was amplified by PCR from the mycobacteria tuberculosis H37Rv.Subsequently, the 19-ss gene was cloned into the E.coli-BCG shuttle vector pOLYG, which can schlepped and expressed exogenous antigen gene on cell wall of mycobacteria and containing the Der p2 gene.
In conclusion, this study demonstrated that E. pekinensis induces inflammation and increases the expression of AQP3, causing disorders of water metabolism, which may lead to gastrointestinal side effects such as diarrhea.
Since trophoblast apoptosis is exacerbated in preeclampsia, we hypothesized that placental AQP3 is increased in these placentas in order to trigger the programmed cell death.
Here, we examined mRNA levels, protein expression and localization of AQP3 in placentas from pregnancies complicated by preeclampsia and against what we expected, we found that AQP3 expression was significantly reduced, both at protein and mRNA levels, compared to normal placentas.
In the light of our results, further studies are required to evaluate whether the decreased expression of AQP3 might be an adaptive response of the placenta to reduce the trophoblast apoptosis, which is related to the clinical manifestations of preeclampsia.
We hypothesized that AQP3 expression in intestinal epithelial cells is altered in intestinal inflammation and that these changes are driven by tumor necrosis factor (TNF) Alfa Human colonic adenocarcinoma (HT-29) cells were treated with TNFAlfa to investigate signaling mechanisms in vitro.
Increasing evidence suggests that the water/glycerol channel aquaporin-3 (AQP3) plays a pivotal role in cancer metastasis.
AQP3 knockout mice were resistant to skin tumor formation and overexpression correlated with metastasis and poor prognosis in patients with breast or gastric cancer.
In cultured cancer cells, increased AQP3 expression stimulated several intracellular signaling pathways and resulted in increased cell proliferation, migration, and invasion as well as aggravation of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition.
Here, we give a thorough review of current knowledge regarding AQP3 expression in cancer and how AQP3 contributes to cancer progression via signaling that modulates cellular mechanisms.
This review article will expand our understanding of the known pathophysiological findings regarding AQP3 in cancer.
However, the relationships of AQP3 with GIM classification and with other proteins, and their roles in the transition from GIM to gastric carcinoma (GC) remain unknown.
The expression of retinoid X receptor Gamma (RXRGamma) and the clinicopathological parameters of total 69 patients with papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) larger than 1 cm were examined.
LGD1069 therapy decreases proliferation in an anaplastic thyroid cancer cell line that expresses retinoid X receptor-gamma, and this effect is confirmed with decreased tumor size in vivo in a nude mouse model.
The possibility should be considered to use cis-retinoic acid as an independent therapeutic approach in patients with radioiodine non-avid foci of thyroid carcinoma especially those showing high expression of RARb and RXRg receptors.
We studied three thyroid carcinoma cell lines: BHP 5-16 (PPARgamma-/RXRgamma+), BHP 2-7 (PPARgamma+/-/RXRgamma-), and DRO-90 (RXRgamma+/PPARgamma+).
The in vivo studies on the subcutaneous human ovarian carcinoma SKOV-3 xenograft model confirmed that PEG-P(LG-DTDP-Pt) micelles showed significant antitumor activity and reduced side effects, compared with free cisplatin.
PtBz-SFNs trigger strong cytotoxic effects against human ovarian carcinoma A2780 cells and their cisplatin-resistant variant A2780cisR cells.
trans-7,8, the neutral cis- or trans-[PtCl2{NH=C(NH2)R}2] (cis-1-3 and trans-1-3) and the cationic cis- or trans-[Pt(NH3)2{NH=C(NH2)R}2](Cl)2 (cis-4-6 and trans-4-6) (R=NMe2 [1,4], NEt2 [2,5], NC5H10 [3,6]) in two human cancer cell lines, CH1 (ovarian carcinoma) and SW480 (colon cancer), confirmed that the cytotoxicity of several trans-configured (trans-3,6) complexes is higher than that of cis-congeners (cis-3,6).
Upon NIR light illumination, the Pt(IV) prodrug complex is activated at the surface of the nanoparticle and active components are selectively released which display cytotoxicity against human ovarian carcinoma A2780 cells and its cisplatin-resistant variant A2780cis cells.
Although no definite boundaries exist, it may be suggested that the IL-6/Th17/IL-17 pathway primarily drives systemic inflammation while the IL-12/Th1/IFN-Gamma pathway dominates in vascular wall inflammation both in TAK and giant cell arteritis.
Recently, the following news were reported: * Early aging of the immune system with thymus insufficiency has now been reported for both patients with rheumatoid arthritis and axial spondyloarthritis, without prethymic lack of progenitors at least in rheumatoid arthritis.. * For giant cell arteritis, the most frequent vasculitis in the elderly, an increased expression of IL-17A in temporal artery biopsies coincides with good prognosis and reponse to glucocorticoids.. * Concerning immunosenescence in systemic lupus erythematosus, BAFF appears to have an important role for relapses after B-cell depletion.. For the future it can be anticipated that the use of unified classification criteria for rheumatic diseases (as with the new 2012 EULAR / ACR classification criteria for polymyalgia rheumatica) will ensure better comparability of immunological studies also in the elderly.
Hemochromatosis gene (HFE) mutations and the hepatitis C virus (HCV) are known risk factors for porphyria cutanea tarda (PCT), but interactions with erythrocytic uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase (UROD) have seldom been addressed.
It is now considered that hepatic iron overload related to the combination of heterogeneous genetic traits and environmental factors, including alcoholism and viral hepatitis, precipitates the expression of PCT through the inhibition of uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase (Uro.D).
RAGs could enable general practitioners to be more effective gatekeepers to genetics services, empowering them to reassure the majority of patients with a family history of breast and ovarian cancer who are not at increased genetic risk.
The serum concentrations of immunosuppressive acidic protein (IAP), CA 125, alpha-1-antitrypsin (AL-1-AT), C-reactive protein (CRP) and ceruloplasmin (COP) were determined in 63 patients with ovarian carcinoma (mean age 56.9 +/- 11.1 years).
However, remarkably little is known about whether ClC-3 is involved in atherosclerosis.
The ClC-3 chloride channel (and current, ICl,ClC-3) plays an important role in cell volume regulation, proliferation, and apoptosis in vascular smooth muscle cells, and is a potential target for prevention of vascular remodelling and stroke.
We previously reported that diabetes decreased the expression of renal tight junction (TJ) proteins claudin-5 in glomerulus, and claudin-2 and occludin in proximal tubule through an oxidative stress dependent way.
We also found that diabetes induced tyrosine nitration (3-NT), SUMOylation and phosphorylation in serine residues of claudin-2 and atRA prevented these changes.
A case-control study was designed to compare the frequencies of the polymorphism at four sites in the SUFU gene in control and NTDs group, as well as in subtype groups, including anencephaly, spina bifida and encephalocele.
Drug-drug interactions (DDIs) may occur in prostate cancer patients due to inhibition by abiraterone of liver cytochrome P450 (CYP)-dependent enzymes CYP2C8 and 2D6, which are involved in the metabolism of approximately 25% of all drugs, and induction by enzalutamide of CYP3A4, 2C9 and 2C19, which metabolize up to 50% of medications.
Unexplored electrochemical behavior of abiraterone, a recent and widely used prostate cancer drug, in interaction with cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4) enzyme and multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) is investigated in this work.
Scutellariae radix (SR) could significantly increase the activity of glutathione peroxidase, catalase, and superoxide dismutase associated with OS in lipopolysaccharide-induced RAW264.7 cell damage and 2,4,6-trinitrobenzene sulfonic acid (TNBS)-induced ulcerative colitis ratsThe level of malondialdehyde was markedly reduced by SR both in vitro and in vivo SR could decrease the severity of acute TNBS-induced colitis in ratsSR could significantly downregulate the expression of transforming growth factor beta 1 protein in colon tissue.
Abbreviations used: OS: Oxidative stress, UC: Ulcerative colitis, SR: Scutellariae radix, TNBS: 2,4,6-trinitrobenzene sulfonic acid, DAI: Disease activity index, MPO: Myeloperoxidase, GSH-PX: Glutathione peroxidase, CAT: Catalase, SOD: Superoxide dismutase, MDA: Malondialdehyde, TGF-Beta1: Transforming growth factor beta 1, OD: Optical density, ROS: Reactive oxygen species.
A 14-year-old girl presented with encephalopathy, delirium and ophthalmoplegia following a 3day history of high-grade fever.
During in vitro culture period, the undifferentiated rat spermatogonial colonies co-expressed E-cadherin and glial-derived neurotrophic factor family receptor alpha-1 or E-cadherin and promyelocytic leukemia zinc finger.
Adenosine deaminase (ADA), 5'nucleotidase (5'NT), ecto-5'NT, purine nucleoside phosphorylase (PNP), hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase (HGPRT), adenine phosphoribosyltransferase (APRT), adenosine kinase (AK), AMP-deaminase (AMPD) and adenylate kinase (AdKin) activities were assayed in peripheral blood lymphoid cells from 20 patients with B-cell type chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL).
Adenosine deaminase (ADA), purine nucleoside phosphorylase (PNP), 5'nucleotidase (5'NT), ecto-5'NT, hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase(HGPRT), adenine phosphoribosyltransferase(APRT), adenosine kinase(AK), AMP deaminase (AMPD) and adenylate kinase(AdKin) activities were assayed in leukemic cells from bone marrow and/or peripheral blood of 43 newly diagnosed children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia(ALL).
ADA activity was higher in E-rosette positive leukemia(E+ ALL), while HGPRT, APRT, PNP, 5'NT, ecto-5'NT and AdKin activities were found to be lower in E+ ALL as compared to E- ALL.
To demonstrate the role of CXCR1/CXCR2-expressing neutrophils in hepatic injury, we investigated CXCR1/CXCR2 receptor expression in 17 hepatitis B virus-related ACLF patients in comparison to 42 chronic hepatitis B and 18 healthy controls.
In this study, we investigated the dynamic expression of CXCR1 and CXCR2 on neutrophils, and found that patients with hepatitis B virus-related ACLF displayed low expression of CXCR1 and CXCR2 on peripheral neutrophils compared with healthy subjects and patients with chronic hepatitis B.
We observed a preferential migration of CXCR2-expressing, central memory CD4 T cells in response to HIV infection of RTECs.
Down-regulation or heterozygous mutations of Kruppel-like factor 1 (KLF1) is associated with elevated HbF levels in non-thalassemia subjects.
This study confirms that experimental down-regulation of KLF1 in Beta0-thalassemia/HbE-derived erythroblasts significantly increases HbF production (up to 52.3 +/- 2.4%), albeit with slightly delayed erythroid terminal differentiation.
KLF1 exome sequencing of 130 Thai Beta0-thalassemia/HbE patients without co-inheritance of Alfa-thalassemia found six patients with KLF1 heterozygous mutations including rs2072596 (p.F182L; n = 5) and rs745347362 (p.P284L; n = 1) missense mutations.
These results suggest that while reduction of KLF1 expression in Beta0-thalassemia/HbE erythroblasts can increase HbF levels, it is not sufficient to alleviate the clinical phenotype.
The co-inheritance of this novel KLF1 variant might have increased the HbF levels in the mother and may have ameliorated the clinical manifestations of the 6-year-old untransfused Beta-thalassemia homozygous child.
Here, we found that KLF1 mutations modulate the phenotype in a cohort of Alfa-thalassemia carriers.
Application of CRISPR technology to induce an indel in the KLF1 gene in adult erythroid progenitors may provide a method for activating fetal hemoglobin expression in individuals with Beta-thalassemia or sickle cell disease.
CD133(+) stem cells were isolated from umbilical cord blood of a newborn with minor Beta-thalassemia in order to evaluate the effects of these two drugs on the in vitro expression of GATA-1 and EKLF genes as erythroid transcription factors.
Using a series of experiments in human prostate cancer cell lines, we validate the highest ranking prediction (TNRC6B) as a ceRNA of PTEN.
Five miR-SNPs in miRNA processing machinery genes, including XPO5 (rs11077), RAN (rs14035), TNRC6B (rs9623117), GEMIN3 (rs197412), and GEMIN4 (rs2740348), in 168 non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) patients were evaluated for their association with the cancer risk and outcomes associated with NHL.
In this study, we investigated six miR-SNPs in microRNA processing machinery genes, including rs11077 of the XPO5 gene, rs14035 of the RAN gene, rs3742330 of the Dicer gene, rs9623117 of the TNRC6B gene, rs197412 of the GEMIN3 gene, and rs2740348 of the GEMIN4 gene, in gastric cancer patients and subsequently evaluated their potential roles in gastric cancer risk in a case control study.
The results indicate that the C/C genotype of rs14035 from RAN, the A/A genotype of rs3742330 from Dicer, and the T/T genotype of rs9623117 from TNRC6B are significantly associated with gastric cancer risk.
We genotyped 6 miR-SNPs of miRNA processing machinery genes including XPO5 (rs11077), RAN (rs14035), Dicer (rs3742330), TNRC6B (rs9623117), GEMIN3 (rs197412), and GEMIN4 (rs2740348) in a case-control study to evaluate their impact on colorectal cancer (CRC) risk.
In this study, we found that let-7c-5p expression was clearly downregulated in breast cancer tissues compared with that of corresponding adjacent tissues.
Furthermore, overexpression of let-7c-5p in MCF-7 breast cancer cells could significantly inhibit cell proliferation and induce cell apoptosis.
Collectively, the present study suggested that let-7c-5p acted as a tumor suppressor in breast cancer possibly by negatively regulating ERCC6, which took an important part in nucleotide excision repair and it may provide a new potential strategy for breast cancer therapy.
When paired teratomas from the same animals were compared, transchromosomic tumours showed a three-fold lower percentage of neuroectodermal tissue, as well as significantly reduced mRNA levels for neuron specific (Tubb3) and glia specific (Gfap) genes, relative to euploid controls.
We determined SLLP1 expression in myeloma cell lines and 394 BM samples from myeloma patients (n = 177) and BM samples from healthy donors (n = 11).
896 blood samples and 64 BM samples from myeloma patients (n = 263) and blood from healthy donors (n = 112) were analyzed for anti-SLLP1 antibodies.
In this study, we determined whether SLLP1 is a novel cancer-testis antigen in hematologic malignancies SLLP1 expression in hematologic tumor cells and normal tissues was determined using a combination of reverse transcription-PCR, real-time PCR, and Western blot analysis.
SLLP1 was aberrantly expressed in the tumor cells from 2 of 9 acute myeloid leukemia, 3 of 11 chronic lymphocytic leukemia, 4 of 14 chronic myeloid leukemia, and 6 of 17 multiple myeloma.
SLLP1 is a novel cancer-testis antigen in hematologic malignancies and is capable of eliciting B-cell immune responses in vivo in cancer-bearing individuals.
SLLP1 mRNA (size, approximately 1 kb) appeared to be expressed only in the testis and in the Burkitt lymphoma Raji cell line.
Prostatic calculi are seen in chronic prostatitis, chronic pelvic pain syndrome and benign prostate hyperplasia; however, in patients with AKU, prostatic calculi and/or calcifications are more extensive.
Levosulpiride is a 5HT4 agonist/D2 antagonist prokinetic agent used to improve gastric emptying in patients with functional dyspepsia or gastroparesis.
Serotonin 5-hydroxytryptamine 4(5-HT4) receptor agonists have been widely prescribed as a prokinetics drug for patients with gastro-esophageal reflux disease and functional dyspepsia.
Tumour cells were immunopositive for pancytokeratin, vimentin, CD10, CK19 and AMACR, confirming a diagnosis of tubulocystic renal cell carcinoma (TC-RCC).
However, C3F positive individuals with migraine were found to have an increased incidence of osteoarthritis (Chi square = 10.06; p &lt; 0.0008) and hypertension (Chi square = 5.18; p &lt; 0.01).
An increased frequency of the rarer C3F allele has been reported in patients with the autoantibody nephritic factor and in several other autoimmune conditions such as rheumatoid arthritis and IgA nephropathy.
Immunohistochemical expressions of SIRT1, DBC1, Beta-catenin, surviving, and p53 were evaluated using 2 mm tumor cores from 349 colorectal cancer patients for tissue microarray.
Deleted in breast cancer 1 (DBC1) was initially cloned from a region homozygously deleted in breast cancers, but its role in colorectal cancer remains unknown.
The present study aims to examine the expression level of DBC1 and assess its prognostic value in human colorectal cancer.
Immunohistochemical staining was performed to detect the expression level of DBC1 in a series of 186 colorectal cancer patients.
Compared with the corresponding non-tumor tissues, a higher expression level of DBC1 was detected in colorectal cancer (P &lt; 0.01).
Univariate Cox regression suggested that DBC1 expression, poorly differentiation status and the presence of lymph node metastasis predict shorter overall survival in colorectal cancer (P &lt; 0.05).
Multivariate Cox regression analysis indicated that DBC1 acts as an independent prognostic factor in colorectal cancer (P &lt; 0.01).
These results suggest that DBC1 is over-expressed in colorectal cancer and that it might serve as a predictor for selecting patients at high risk of poor prognosis.
By targeting PAD2, NTZ increased the deamination (citrullination) and turnover of Beta-catenin in colon cancer cells.
In Wnt-activated colon cancer cells, knockout of either PAD2 or Beta-catenin substantially increased resistance to NTZ treatment.
PAD2, PAD4, and citrullinated proteins are found in the synovium of rheumatoid arthritis patients.
The isozymes hPAD2 and hPAD4 have been implicated in the development and progression of several autoimmune diseases, including rheumatoid arthritis and multiple sclerosis.
The peptidylarginine deiminase PADI2 has been implicated in chronic inflammatory diseases and cancer.
PADI2 expression was required for survival and cell-cycle progression of prostate cancer cells, and PADI2 promoted proliferation of prostate cancer cells under androgen-deprived or castration conditions in vitro and in vivo Cytoplasmic PADI2 protected the androgen receptor (AR) against proteasome-mediated degradation and facilitated AR binding to its target genes after nuclear translocation and citrullination of histone H3 amino acid residue R26.
Notably, coadministration of the PADI inhibitor Cl-Amidine and the AR signaling inhibitor enzalutamide synergized in inhibiting CRPC cell proliferation in vitro and tumor growth in vivo Overall, our results establish PADI2 as a key mediator for AR in prostate cancer progression, especially CRPC, and they suggest PADI as novel therapeutic targets in this disease setting.
The effects of endothelial endothelin-1 (ET-1) over-expression in a transgenic mouse model using Tie-1 promoter (TET-1 mice) on pathophysiological changes of retinal ischemia were investigated by intraluminal insertion of a microfilament up to middle cerebral artery (MCA) to transiently block the ophthalmic artery.
In agreement with the decreased FoxO3 activity in Beta-thalassemia, the expression of FoxO3 target genes was also found to decrease, concurrent with elevated phosphorylation of AKT, most clearly at the late stage of erythroid differentiation.
Our findings provide further evidence for the involvement of FoxO3 during terminal erythropoiesis and confirm the modulation of the PI3K/AKT pathway as a potential therapeutic strategy for Beta-thalassemia.
Western blot analysis revealed that Notch2HCS mutant splenocytes had increased phospho-Akt and phospho-Jun N-terminal kinase, and gene expression analysis of splenic CD19+ B cells demonstrated induction of Hes1 and Hes5 in Notch2HCS mutants.
The bone marrow transplantation further suggested that the amelioration of atherosclerosis might be attributed to the effects of IRF3 deficiency mainly in endothelial cells, as well as in macrophages.
Thus, our study suggests that IRF3 might be a potential target for the treatment of atherosclerosis development.
We examined cell cycle-related molecules in K562 transfected with NIC or RBP-J(R218H), and found that the protein level of the retinoblastoma gene product (the Rb protein) was induced in K562 expressing NIC, and down-regulated in K562 expressing RBP-J(R218H).
Two negative regulatory elements, the 3'-retinoblastoma control element (RCE) and the binding site for Epstein-Barr virus C-promoter binding factor 1 (CBF1), also contributed to CpG ODN induction of hIL-6 gene expression.
All data and technical reports of the 15 rounds of polio SIAs from June 2013 through June 2015 and routine immunization coverages for DPT-Hib-HepB 3 and measles were observed.
According to the Ethiopian Health Sector Development Plan IV annual performance report (HSDP IV), Ethiopia targeted to reach 90% coverage with DPT-Hib-HepB 3 (Pentavalent3) vaccine and 86% coverage with measles vaccine in 2010- 2011.
Only 24.5% of Syrian refugee children in Jordan and 12.5% in Lebanon were fully immunized through routine vaccination services (having received from non-campaign sources: measles, polio 1-3, and DPT 1-3 in Jordan and Lebanon, and BCG in Jordan).
Methods: We utilized datasets from the Demographic and Health Surveys Program, available for Benin, Burkina Faso, The Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Cote d'Ivoire, Liberia, Mali, Niger, Nigeria, Senegal, Sierra Leone and Togo, to obtain coverage for Bacillus Calmette-Guerin, polio, measles, and diphtheria, pertussis and tetanus (DPT) vaccines in children aged 12 - 23 months.
We also calculated the DPT1-to-DPT3 and DPT1-to-measles dropouts, and proportions of the fully immunised child (FIC).
Similarly, DPT1-measles dropout exceeded 10% in all but four countries.
We defined full immunization coverage (FIC) as having received one dose of BCG (bacille Calmette-Guerin), one dose of measles, three doses of polio, and three doses of DPT vaccines.
Using Medecins Sans Frontieres (MSF)-provided data and modifying our decision-tree models, we estimated if administering Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib)-containing (pentavalent vaccine, also with diphtheria pertussis and tetanus [DPT] and hepatitis B) and pneumococcal conjugate (PCV) vaccines were cost-effective against hospitalized pneumonia.
Median coverage across all districts for each of eight vaccine doses (1 Bacille Calmette-Guerin dose, 3 DPT doses, 3 oral poliovirus vaccine doses, and 1 measles vaccine dose) was &lt;50%.
The primary outcome was full vaccination coverage with all five vaccines (1 dose of BCG, 3 doses of hepatitis B, 3 doses of OPV, 3 doses of DPT and 1 dose of measles vaccine), and the secondary outcome was coverage with each dose of the five individual vaccines.
The current data strongly suggest that cathepsin-S degradation of nidogen-1 is strongly associated with NSCLC, which needs validation in larger clinical cohorts.
The mRNA expression levels of 9 genes, including EGF, Cathepsin K, Cathepsin S, COX-2, MMP-9, PDGF, uPA, VEGFA, HGF, were evaluated by real-time PCR in 98 NSCLC.
The mRNA expression levels of IL-10, cathepsin B, cathepsin S, which were closely related with TAM according to the literatures, were evaluated by Quantitative real-time RT-PCR in 63 NSCLC.
The expression of 13 Cathepsins was examined using DNA-microarray technology in tumor tissues of 89 surgically treated NSCLC patients.
The combined expression level of Cathepsins B and K identifies high-risk NSCLC patients.
We measured plasma cystatin C concentration and activity of cathepsins B and L in tumor tissue as possible markers for the efficiency of antitumor therapy and prognostic criteria for Lewis lung adenocarcinoma in mice.
We hypothesized that PLX-PAD cells would reduce the associated inflammation and tissue damage and lower blood pressure in mice with pre-eclampsia induced by TLR3 or TLR7 activation.
Although this is the first study of the association between TLR3 polymorphisms and preeclampsia, we found that TLR3 polymorphisms are unlikely to play a significant role in the development of preeclampsia in the Chinese Han population.
Here, we examined the role of microRNA-182 (miR-182) in pancreatic cancer development.
Analysis of human pancreatic cancer specimens and cell lines showed that miR-182 is overexpressed in pancreatic cancer and promotes tumor proliferation and invasion.
The oncogenic effect of miR-182 and its reversal by Beta-TrCP2 were confirmed in vivo This study suggests that Beta-TrCP and miR-182 may be possible biomarkers and targets for early detection and treatment of pancreatic cancer.
However, less information on the circulating miR-182 in pancreatic cancer (PCa) is available.
Our data suggest that circulating miR-182 may be a potential and useful noninvasive tumor marker for diagnosis and prognosis of pancreatic cancer.
In this study, we investigated the role and underlying mechanism of action of miR-182 in papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC).
In this study, we use mouse and human medulloblastoma stem-like cells belonging to the Sonic Hedgehog subgroup (SHH MB-SLCs) and demonstrate that genetic suppression of EZH2 reduces the level of its histone mark H3K27me3 and lowers proliferation and self-renewal.
Here, we reported more abundant expression of maternal embryonic leucine-zipper kinase (MELK) and enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) in medulloblastoma stem-like cells than in neural stem cells and the interaction between the two proteins could mediate the self-renewal of sonic hedgehog subtype medulloblastoma.
In human medulloblastoma, extensive nodularity and large-cell/anaplastic subgroups differed according to the staining levels of MELK and EZH2 from the other two subgroups.
Mechanistically, MELK bound to and phosphorylated EZH2, and its methylation was induced by EZH2 in medulloblastoma, which could regulate the proliferation of cancer stem-like cells.
In xenografts, loss of MELK or EZH2 attenuated medulloblastoma stem-like cell-derived tumor growth and promoted differentiation.
These findings indicate that MELK-induced phosphorylation and EZH2-mediated methylation in MELK/EZH2 pathway are essential for medulloblastoma stem-like cell-derived tumor proliferation, thereby identifying a potential therapeutic strategy for these patients.Implications: This study demonstrates that the interaction occurring between MELK and EZH2 promotes self-proliferation and stemness, thus representing an attractive therapeutic target and potential candidate for diagnosis of medulloblastoma.
The most aggressive of four medulloblastoma (MB) subgroups are cMyc-driven group 3 (G3) tumors, some of which overexpress EZH2, the histone H3K27 mono-, di-, and trimethylase of polycomb-repressive complex 2.
Phase II trials for brain tumors will investigate agents that act on cMET, PDGFRA, or EZH2 in HGG, DIPG, or medulloblastoma, respectively.
Overexpression of the Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) subunit Enhancer of Zeste 2 (EZH2) occurs in several malignancies, including prostate cancer, breast cancer, medulloblastoma, and glioblastoma multiforme.
Silencing of OTX2 in D425 medulloblastoma cells resulted in downregulation of polycomb genes such as EZH2, EED, SUZ12 and RBBP4 and upregulation of H3K27 demethylases KDM6A, KDM6B,                 JARID2 and KDM7A.
Peripheral blood mononuclear cells of typhoid fever patients had a higher percentage of lymphocytic cells expressing intracellular granzyme A and granzyme B, but not granzyme K, compared to controls.
The pediatric sarcoma Alveolar Rhabdomyosarcoma, which is primarily characterized by the expression of the PAX3-FOXO1 oncogenic fusion protein, consists of undifferentiated muscle cells.
One specific example for such a cancer type is alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma, which is associated in the majority of cases with the fusion protein PAX3-FOXO1.
In this review, we will discuss the current knowledge regarding potential therapeutic targets that might contribute to indirect interference with PAX3-FOXO1 activity in alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma at the different molecular levels and extrapolate these findings to fusion transcription factors in general.
This study is also the first to demonstrate FOXO1 gene rearrangements in malignant ectomesenchymoma with alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma subtype.
Alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma (aRMS) is a pediatric soft tissue cancer commonly associated with a chromosomal translocation that leads to the expression of a Pax3:Foxo1 or Pax7:Foxo1 fusion protein, the developmental underpinnings of which may give clues to its therapeutic approaches.
We show that interactions within the PAX3 and FOXO1 domains are restricted to their respective TADs in normal conditions, while in a patient-derived alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma cell line, harbouring the diagnostic t(2;13)(q35;q14) translocation that brings together the PAX3 and FOXO1 genes, the PAX3 promoter interacts ectopically with FOXO1 sequences.
The chromosomal translocation that leads to alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma development generates a novel TAD that is likely to favour ectopic PAX3:FOXO1 oncogene activation in non-PAX3 territories.
In myasthenia gravis, anti-Kv1.4 and anti-Lrp4 have been characterized as promising novel autoantibodies for the diagnosis of hitherto 'seronegative' myasthenia gravis.
In a recent study on the submandibular gland of diabetic subjects, we found changed expression of statherin, a salivary protein of fundamental importance in preserving tooth integrity, whose reduction was related with the high incidence of oral diseases in patients with diabetes.
The goal of this report is to extend the study to human parotid gland and to compare the effects of diabetes on statherin expression with those previously described in submandibular gland.
The results indicate that diabetes affects statherin secretion in labial glands and support the hypothesis that the increased susceptibility to oral diseases associated with diabetes could be related with a reduced statherin secretion.
The results obtained suggest that a reduced statherin secretion by salivary glands might be partly responsible for a less effective protection of the oral tissues, resulting in an higher incidence of caries and oral infections associated with diabetes.
Paxillin (PXN) gene mutations are associated with lung adenocarcinoma progression and PXN is known to be a target gene of microRNA-218 (miR-218).
FISH and IHC analysis of lung adenocarcinoma suggests that relatively small-scale genomic rearrangements of chromosome 12 are associated with paxillin overexpression in lung adenocarcinoma.
Using lung adenocarcinoma FFPE samples and cell lines derived from lung adenocarcinomas, we demonstrated that the gene copy number for MET in lung adenocarcinoma tissue samples was preferentially increased over EGFR, HGF, and PXN and that it positively correlated with a better prognosis.
By proteomic analysis of striatal lysates from Rhes-heterozygous mice with wild-type or partial or complete knockout of Rasgrp1, we identified a diverse set of Rhes-interacting proteins, the "Rhesactome," and determined that RasGRP1 affected the composition of the amphetamine-induced Rhesactome, which included PDE2A (phosphodiesterase 2A; a protein associated with major depressive disorder), LRRC7 (leucine-rich repeat-containing 7; a protein associated with bipolar disorder and ADHD), and DLG2 (discs large homolog 2; a protein associated with chronic pain).
To investigate the expression of miR-96 and related target genes in the regulation of prostatic cancer, we compared the expression of miR-96 in both prostatic cancer and adjacent normal tissues, and explored the role of miR-96 in prostate cancer.
The expressional alternation of miR-96 target genes, forkhead box O1 (FOXO1) and forkhead box O3a (FOXO3a), in prostatic cancer, was confirmed by PC-3 cells transfected with miR-96 and anti miR-96.
As target genes of miR-96, FOXO1 and FOXO3a confer protection against prostatic cancer, while the inhibition of FOXO1 and FOXO3a enhances cancer proliferation.
Recent research suggested that microRNA 96 (miR-96) might function as an oncogene in several types of cancers.
Therefore, this study determined to probe into the mechanism of miR-96 in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells.
Results using an 84-cancer specific miRNA panel identified the upregulation of miR-141-3p and miR-96-5p along with a downregulation of miR-26, miR-126-3p, miR-23b, miR-195-5p, miR-374a and let-7 family of miRNAs in endometrial cancer.
In the present study, we determined the expression of miR-96 and the function of its target genes in lung cancer through bioinformatic analysis.
Compared to the control group, expression of miR-96 was significantly increased in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) (GSE51855), lung adenocarcinoma (GSE48414), stage I adenocarcinoma tissues (GSE63805) and the plasma of lung cancer patients (GSE68951).
miR-96 was also elevated in six different NSCLC cell lines.
However, the expression level of miR-96 was not related to the age, gender, clinical stage and histological subtype of the NSCLC patients.
In conclusion, miR-96, functioning as an oncogene, may play an important role in the development and progression of lung cancer.
miR-96 may have the potential to serve as a molecular biomarker for the early diagnosis of NSCLC.
However, other functions of miR-96-5p in breast cancer, particularly those that are associated with autophagy, remain unknown.
miR-96-5p expression was demonstrated to be upregulated in breast cancer cells compared with in normal breast epithelial cells.
These data indicate that miR-96-5p is involved in the progression of breast cancer cells and may represent a potential therapeutic target for the treatment of breast cancer.
Moreover, miR-96 and miR-182 are onco-microRNAs that increase proliferation, migration, and tumorigenesis in breast cancer cells.
Initially, bioinformatics tools were used to identify the target genes that have binding sites for miR-7, MiR-9, MiR-96, and miR-182 and are also associated with breast cancer.
Respectively, three, three, three, and seven genes were found to have binding sites for miR-7, miR-9, miR-96, and miR-182 and were associated with breast cancer.
Moreover, miR-96 may play an oncogenic role in breast cancer by suppressing the apoptosis through the regulation of ABCA1.
Based on medullary traction as responsible for idiopathic syringomyelia (SMI), idiopathic scoliosis (ESCID), Arnold Chiari malformation (ARCH), platybasia (PTB), basilar impression (IMB), odontoid recess (RTO) kinking of the brain stem (KTC) and considering the medullary traction to be transmitted by the filum terminale (FT), a surgical technique for the section of FT (SFT) is described in three cases of SMI, one of ESCID, and one of ARCH with no lumbar dysraphia.
A common aetiopathogenic theory for basilar groove (IMB), platybasia (PTB), odontoid retrocession (RTO), kinking of the brainstem (KTC) applied to idiopathic syringomyelia (SMI), idiopathic scoliosis (ESCID) and Arnold-Chiari malformation (ARCH) is presented.
The major theories of the pathogenesis of idiopathic syringomyelia (SMI), idiopathic scoliosis (ESCID) and the Arnold-Chiari malformation (ARCH) are reviewed.
The CXCL13 expression levels correlated with the degree of chronic gastritis and bacterial colonization.
The enhanced induction of CXCL13 may be involved in the pathogenesis of H. pylori-associated gastritis.
We have studied the expression of 2 chemokines that attract B lymphocytes, BCA-1 and SLC, in gastric tissue samples obtained from patients with chronic gastritis induced by Hp infection or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, as well as from patients with Hp-associated low-grade and high-grade gastric lymphomas.
Our findings indicate that BCA-1, which functions as a homing chemokine in normal lymphoid tissue, is induced in chronic Hp gastritis and is involved in the formation of lymphoid follicles and gastric lymphomas of the MALT type.
We provide novel functional data that posttranscriptional silencing of gene RPL19 using RNAi not only abrogates the malignant phenotype of PC-3M prostate cancer cells but is selective with respect to transcription and translation of other genes.
We attempted to specifically quantify transcripts of faecal cytokeratin 19 (CK19) and ribosomal protein L19 (RPL19) RNA expression of colorectal cancer and clarify their correlation with clinicopathological parameters and survival in combination.
RPL19 was overexpressed in the lung cancer tissue from patient H1224.
All of the normal tissues examined expressed lower levels of RPL19 mRNA than that of the lung cancer tissue.
RPL19 was also found to be overexpressed in 12 of 30 (40%) non-small-cell lung cancer tissues by immunohistochemical staining.
In addition, the suppression of RPL19 expression by transfection with small interfering RNA resulted in the suppression of cyclinD1, D3 synthesis, and the growth inhibition of lung cancer cell lines overexpressing RPL19.
The gene encoding ribosomal protein L19 (RPL19), a prognostic marker for human prostate cancer, is differentially expressed in CRC patients.
We tested cytokeratin 19 (CK19), maspin, mammaglobin, GAPDH and RPL19 genes for their level of expression and linearity of amplification in serial dilutions of RNA extracted from the MDA-MB-231, UACC-812, T47D and HS578T breast cancer cell lines.
Methods I analyzed selected articles about calcium-sensing receptors, FHH, PHPT, CASR, GNA11, and AP2S1.
Results FHH usually results from a heterozygous germline inactivating mutation of the CASR, and less frequently from mutation of GNA11 or AP2S1.
FHH reflects heterozygous germline mutation of CASR, GNA11, or AP2S1.
Patients with familial hyperparathyroidism and low urinary calcium excretion may have familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia (FHH) with mutations in one of three genes: the calcium-sensing receptor (CaSR) defining FHH-type 1, the adaptor-related protein complex 2 (AP2S1) related to FHH-type 3 or the G-protein subunit alpha11 (GNA11) associated with FHH-type 2.
Clinically, patients with AP2S1 mutations had significant cognitive and behavioral disorders, and higher blood calcium and magnesium levels than patients with FHH1.
CaSR and AP2S1 sequencing is worthwhile in patients with familial hyperparathyroidism and phenotype suggesting FHH as it can diagnose up to 50% of cases.
Recently, mutations affecting codon 15 in the gene AP2S1 have been shown to cause FHH type 3 in up to 26% of CASR-negative FHH patients.
We hypothesized that mutations in AP2S1 and GNA11 are causative in Danish patients with suspected FHH and that these mutations are not found in patients with primary hyperparathyroidism (PHPT), which is the main differential diagnostic disorder.
In 33 CASR-negative patients with suspected FHH, we found two (~6%) with a mutation in AP2S1 (p.Arg15Leu and p.Arg15His).
We suggest that the best diagnostic approach to hyperparathyroid hypercalcemic patients suspected to have FHH is to screen the CASR and AP2S1 codon 15 for mutations.
Thus, loss- and gain-of-function mutations of the GNA11 gene on chromosome 19p13.3, which encodes the G-protein Alfa-11 (GAlfa11) subunit, lead to FHH type 2 and ADH type 2, respectively; whilst loss-of-function mutations of AP2S1 on chromosome 19q13.3, which encodes the adaptor-related protein complex 2 sigma (AP2Sigma) subunit, cause FHH type 3.
Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia (FHH) is a genetically heterogeneous condition resembling primary hyperparathyroidism (PHPT) but not curable by surgery; FHH types 1, 2, and 3 are due to loss-of-function mutations of the CASR, GNA11, or AP2S1 genes, respectively.
FHH3 was recently found to be caused by codon Arg15 (p.R15) mutations in the adaptor-related protein complex 2, Sigma-2 subunit that interacts with the CaSR and is encoded by the AP2S1 gene.
The objective of the study was to assess the prevalence of AP2S1 mutations, and describe the phenotype of FHH3, in an independent cohort of FHH subjects lacking CASR mutations.
The results affirm that a significant number of patients suspected of having FHH but proven negative for CASR mutation have AP2S1 p.R15 mutations.
Screening for AP2S1 p.R15 mutations in such cases should be considered, given the clinical benefits (avoiding unnecessary parathyroidectomy) that have already been demonstrated for CASR screening in FHH1.
mRNA expression analysis was performed on 32 cervical cancer cases to determine the expression of the EGFR ligands amphiregulin, Beta-cellulin, epidermal growth factor (EGF), epiregulin, heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor (HB-EGF) and transforming growth factor Alfa (TGFAlfa).
We further demonstrated that miR-34c-5p inhibited ovarian cancer stemness through downregulation of the AREG-EGFR-ERK pathway.
Overexpression of AREG was found to be correlated with advanced ovarian cancer stages and poor prognosis.
Taken together, our data suggest that AREG promotes ovarian cancer stemness and drug resistance via the AREG-EGFR-ERK pathway and this is inhibited by miR-34c-5p.
Targeting AREG, miR-34c-5p could be a potential strategy for anti-cancer-stem cell therapy in ovarian cancer.
In endometrial cancer tissues, downregulation of LSR and upregulation of AREG were observed together with malignancy, and Yes-associated protein (YAP) was present in the nuclei.
The loss of LSR promoted cell invasion and migration via upregulation of TEAD1/AREG dependent on YAP/pYAP and AMOT/Merlin in human endometrial cancer cells.
Amphiregulin (AREG), the most abundant EGFR ligand in ovarian cancer, binds exclusively to EGFR and stimulates ovarian cancer cell invasion by down-regulating E-cadherin expression.
In the present study, we show that treatment with AREG up-regulated SPRY2 expression by activating the EGFR-mediated ERK1/2 signaling pathway in two human ovarian cancer cell lines, SKOV3 and OVCAR5.
Amphiregulin (AREG) binds exclusively to the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and has been considered to be a dominant autocrine/paracrine EGFR ligand in ovarian cancer.
In the present study, we first examined the effects of AREG on SPRY4 expression and the possible underlying molecular mechanisms involved in this process in two human ovarian cancer cell lines.
TGF-Alfa and amphiregulin (AREG), via EGFR, inhibit the Hippo signaling pathway and activate YAP to induce cervical cancer cell proliferation and migration.
Activated YAP allows for up-regulation of TGF-Alfa, AREG, and EGFR, forming a positive signaling loop to drive cervical cancer cell proliferation.
In this study, we report that the EGFR ligand amphiregulin (AREG) stimulates cell invasion and down-regulates E-cadherin expression in two human ovarian cancer cell lines, SKOV3 and OVCAR5.
This study demonstrates that AREG induces ovarian cancer cell invasion by down-regulating E-cadherin expression.
Our comparison of a stratified population with type I psoriasis (n = 155) and healthy controls (N = 197) is the first to reveal a relationship between the CLMN, FBXL19, CCL4L, C17orf51, TYK2, IL13, SLC22A4, CDKAL1, and HLA-B/MICA genes.
To detect the expression level of macrophage inflammatory protein-1 (MIP-1)Alfa, MIP-1Beta and monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) in with psoriasis vulgaris and explore the role in the pathogenesis of psoriasis vulgaris.
The level of MIP-1Alfa, MIP-1Beta and MCP-1 in peripheral blood from 50 patients with psoriasis vulgaris and 50 normal controls were measured by enzyme linked immunosorbent assay.
The level of MIP-1Alfa, MIP-1Beta and MCP-1 was compared between psoriasis vulgaris patients at active stage and resting stage.
The content of MIP-1Alfa, MIP-1Beta and MCP-1 in patients with psoriasis vulgaris was (1342.78 +/- 210.30), (175.28 +/- 28.18) and (266.86 +/- 32.75) ng/L, respectively, significantly higher than those in control group (P&lt;0.05).
The expression level of MIP-1Alfa, MIP-1Beta and MCP-1 in peripheral blood of patients with psoriasis vulgaris was positively correlated with PASI (P&lt;0.01).
After acitretin therapy, expression level of MIP-1Alfa, MIP-1Beta and MCP-1 in peripheral blood of patients with psoriasis vulgaris was significantly decreased.
Chemokine factor MIP-1Alfa, MIP-1Beta and MCP-1 may be involved in the pathogenesis of psoriasis vulgaris.
As the products of CCL3L1 and CCL4L1 potentially play a role in autoimmunity we performed case control association studies with Crohn's disease, rheumatoid arthritis and psoriasis clinical cohorts.
The aim of this study is to evaluate the relationship between CCL4L polymorphisms (including single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and copy number variation (CNV)) and the course and prognosis of psoriasis.
Our results showed that a high CNV (&gt;=3 copies) is associated with psoriasis severity, whereas moderate disease correlated with a lower CNV (&lt;=2 copies); specifically, the CCL4L1 allele frequency is higher in severe psoriasis, whereas CCL4L2 is more frequent in patients with a milder disease.
Serum samples from 85 patients with AA, 20 patients with atopic dermatitis, 20 patients with psoriasis vulgaris and 28 normal controls were examined by the cytometric bead array assay assessing monokine induced by interferon (IFN)-gamma (MIG), RANTES, interleukin-8 (IL-8), IFN-inducible protein-10, monocyte chemoattractant protein-1, macrophage inflammatory protein (MIP)-1alpha, MIP-1beta and eotaxin levels.
We identified a novel NUP98-HOXC11 fusion gene in a pediatric patient with de novo acute myeloid leukemia having t(11;12)(p15;q13).
After running the algorithm on two data sets [triple-negative breast cancer, (TNBC), and estrogen receptor-negative breast cancer, (ERNBC)], we conclude that EpCAM and Beta1 integrin are enough to accurately predict TNBC stage, being ALDH1, CD24, CD61, and CK5 the necessary markers to exactly predict ERNBC stage.
In conclusion, IL-8 activates the PI3K/Akt pathway, which in turn activates NF-KB, resulting in the upregulation of integrin Beta3 expression and increased invasion of estrogen receptor-negative breast cancer cells.
This review provides clinical and molecular information for several of the commonest syndromes associated with A/M: Anophthalmia-Esophageal-Genital syndrome, caused by SOX2 mutations, Anophthalmia and pituitary abnormalities caused by OTX2 mutations, Matthew-Wood syndrome caused by STRA6 mutations, oculofaciocardiodental syndrome and Lenz microphthalmia caused by BCOR mutations, Microphthalmia Linear Skin pigmentation syndrome caused by HCCS mutations, Anophthalmia, pituitary abnormalities, polysyndactyly caused by BMP4 mutations and Waardenburg anophthalmia caused by mutations in SMOC1.
Eye malformations, most commonly coloboma, and cleft palate occur in a significant proportion of Smoc1(tm1a/tm1a) embryos and pups.
The expression of one of the nine mammalian PRMTs, PRMT5, affects the levels of symmetric dimethylarginine (SDMA) at Arg-3 on histone H4, leading to the repression of genes which are related to disease progression in lymphoma and leukemia.
In addition, our study has shown that Belinostat and DZNep together with RA caused a depletion in HDAC1 and HDAC2 protein levels, HDAC2 gene expression and increased hyperacetylation of histone H4 in both leukemia cell lines.
IL-18 was localized by immunohistochemical analysis in brain sections obtained from tuberous sclerosis and encephalitis patients, as well as from gender- and age-matched controls, and in the brain sections of both Reeler and wild-type mice.
IL-18 was detected within glial cells and neurons in the brain of subjects affected by tuberous sclerosis and encephalitis whereas in healthy subjects, only a weak IL-18 positivity was detected at the level of glial cells.
Intrathecal elevations of interleukin-6 and interleukin-8 in all four types of central nervous system manifestations, and of interleukin-18 in late-onset encephalitis were observed.
This led us to examine the potential role of IL-18 in the pathogenesis of VSV encephalitis.
Lafora disease (LD), also known as progressive myoclonic epilepsy-2 (EPM2), is a rare, fatal autosomal recessive disorder typically starting during adolescence in otherwise neurologically normal individuals.
Lafora disease (LD) is a fatal progressive epilepsy essentially caused by loss-of-function mutations in the glycogen phosphatase laforin or the ubiquitin E3 ligase malin.
Lafora disease (LD) is a rare adolescent-onset progressive myoclonic epilepsy caused by loss-of-function mutations either in the EPM2A gene encoding laforin or in the EPM2B gene encoding malin.
Lafora disease (LD) is an autosomal recessive progressive myoclonus epilepsy due to mutations in the EPM2A (laforin) and EPM2B (malin) genes, with no substantial genotype-phenotype differences between the two.
The lack of Lafora's bodies in skin specimens and the molecular analysis excluding mutations in Laforin and Malin genes ruled out Lafora disease.
Hybrid (C56BL/6 x DBA) (BDF1; H-2b/H-2d) mice bearing the P815 leukemia (H-2d) were grafted with a (CBA x C57BL/6)F1 (CBF1; H-2k/H-2b) cell suspension, comprising bone marrow cells (BMC; 25 x 10(6)/mouse) and spleen cells (SC; 55 x 10(6)/mouse) on day-4, then treated with cyclophosphamide (200 mg/kg) on day-2 and finally grafted once more with CBF1 cells (25 x 10(6) BMC + 7 x 10(6) SC) on day 0.
A TL+ leukemia of a (B6 X A)F1 hybrid mouse (H-2b/H-2a) was previously subjected to immunoselection against H-2a by passage in (B6 X A.SW)F1 mice (H-2b/H-2s).
We describe a novel mutation in PSTPIP1 resulting in pyoderma gangrenosum, acne and ulcerative colitis.
This CD2BP1-mediated biochemical pathway(s) may function in common inflammatory disorders with apparent etiological overlap, such as rheumatoid arthritis and inflammatory bowel disease.
Moreover, METTL13-dependent inhibition of bladder cancer cell migration and invasion is mediated by downregulation of FAK (Focal adhesion kinase) phosphorylation, AKT (v-akt murine thymoma viral oncogene) phosphorylation, Beta-catenin expression and MMP-9 expression.
Here, we identify miR-543 as a direct regulator of FAK and TWIST1 expression in endometrial cancer.
Forced expression of miR-543 in endometrial cancer cell lines decreases both endogenous FAK and TWIST1 mRNA and protein levels.
Forced expression of miR-543 in aggressive endometrial cancer cell lines also impairs tumor cell monolayer proliferation, anchorage-independent growth, migration and invasion.
miR-543 expression is decreased in endometrial cancer and serves as a tumor suppressor by targeting FAK and TWIST1 expression.
CD22-targeted recombinant immunotoxins (rIT) are active in hairy cell leukemia or acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), but not in mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) patients.
#目#的#：#探#讨CD5+#小B#细#胞#淋#巴#瘤(small B cell lymphoma, SBL)#的#骨#髓#病#理#学#特#点#。#方#法#：#回#顾#性#分#析#了2003#年1#月#至2015#年5#月#深#圳#市#人#民#医#院#病#理#科92#例CD5+SBL#侵#犯#骨#髓#患#者#的#病#理#档#案#资#料, 92#例#均#行#骨#髓#活#检(bone marrow biopsy, BMB)#标#本#的#形#态#学#及#免#疫#组#织#化#学#染#色#检#查#、#流#式#细#胞#学#检#测#和IgH/CCND1#的#荧#光#原#位#杂#交(fluorescence in situ hybridization, FISH)#检#测#。#结#果#：#慢#性#淋#巴#细#胞#白#血#病/#小#淋#巴#细#胞#性#淋#巴#瘤(chronic lymphocytic leukemia/small lymphocytic lymphoma, CLL/SLL)56#例(60.9%), #套#细#胞#淋#巴#瘤(mantle cell lymphoma, MCL)23#例(25.0%), #其#他#类#型13#例(14.1%), #包#括#滤#泡#性#淋#巴#瘤(follicular lymphoma, FL)5#例, #淋#巴#浆#细#胞#性#淋#巴#瘤(lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma, LPL)4#例, #脾#脏#边#缘#区#淋#巴#瘤(splenic marginal zone lymphoma, SMZL)4#例#。#侵#犯#骨#髓#的#方#式#以#弥#漫#型#最#多#见(28#例), #其#次#为#混#合#型(25#例), #结#节#型(19#例)#及#间#质#型(18#例)#侵#犯#较#少, #窦#内#型#最#少#见(2#例)#。#免#疫#表#型#检#测#示#所#有#病#例#流#式#细#胞#学#检#测#均#表#达CD19, CD20#和CD5#。#免#疫#表#型#积#分#系#统#显#示#所#有CLL/SLL#患#者#为4~5#分, MCL#和#其#他#类#型#患#者#均&lt;=3#分#。13#例#其#他#类#型#的SBL#中, 5#例FL#均#表#达CD10#；3#例FL, 1#例LPL, 3#例SMZL#表#达CD23#。CLL/SLL#与MCL#在CD23, sIgM, FMC7, CD11C, CD22#表#达#率#上#差#异#均#有#统#计#学#意#义(P&lt;0.01)#。#免#疫#组#织#化#学#检#测#结#果#显#示MCL#均#表#达cyclin D1#。FISH#检#测#所#有MCL#均#为IgH/CCND1#阳#性#。#结#论#：CD5+ SBL#包#括#多#种#淋#巴#瘤#类#型, #侵#犯#骨#髓#时#呈#多#种#分#布#方#式#。#流#式#细#胞#学#的#免#疫#表#型#检#测#对#于CD5+ SBL, #尤#其#是CLL/SLL#的#诊#断#和#鉴#别#尤#为#重#要#。.
Moreover, increased hepatic iNKT cell abundance in the absence of MTP is associated with susceptibility to severe iNKT cell-mediated hepatitis, thus demonstrating the importance of CD1d-dependent control of liver iNKT cells in maintaining immunological homeostasis in the liver.
CD1d expression on T cells in peripheral blood samples and liver sections from autoimmune hepatitis patients and healthy individuals were also examined.
Lck-CD1dTgJAlfa18o and Lck-CD1dTgJAlfa18+ mice developed similar degrees of liver pathology resembling chronic autoimmune hepatitis in humans.
A similar mechanism could be extended to humans as CD1d expression is upregulated on activated human T cells and increased presence of CD1d-expressing T cells was observed in autoimmune hepatitis patients.
Lay summary: CD1d overexpression on T cells enhances crosstalk between type II NKT cells and T cells, resulting in their aberrant activation and leading to the development of chronic autoimmune liver disease.
CD1d expression was down-regulated in the biliary epithelium of patients with late primary sclerosing cholangitis, primary biliary cirrhosis, and alcoholic cirrhosis compared to healthy controls.
Patients with alcoholic hepatitis showed significantly increased plasma PS levels and enhanced liver expression of PS and CD1d compared with controls.
In order to explore the role of Gal-3 in NKT-cell-dependent pathology, we induced hepatitis in C57BL/6 WT and Gal-3-deficient mice by using specific ligand for NKT cells: Alfa-galactosylceramide, glycolipid Ag presented by CD1d.
We investigated the expression of 6 CT genes (MAGE-E1, SOX-6, SCP-1, SSX-2, SSX-4, and HOM-TES-85) using reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction in 26 meningiomas and 32 other various brain tumor specimens, obtained from the patients during tumor surgery from 2000 to 2005.
The most frequently expressed CT genes of meningiomas were MAGE-E1, which were found in 22/26 (85%) meningioma samples, followed by SOX-6 (9/26 or 35%).
The data presented here suggest that MAGE-E1 and SOX-6 genes are expressed in a high percentage of human central nervous system tumors, which implies the CT genes could be the potential targets of immunotherapy for human central nervous system tumors.
The restriction fragment length polymorphism of the two human HLA-B-associated transcripts (BATs) genes, BAT1 and BAT2, identifying polymorphic bands of 12, 8, 2.5, and 1.1 kb, and at 3.3, 2.7, 2.3, and 0.9 kb, respectively, was investigated in patients with primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC), systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), pauciarticular juvenile rheumatoid arthritis (P-JRA), rheumatoid arthritis (RA), and primary Sjoegren's syndrome (pSS), and in healthy Danes.
Progranulin (PGRN) has been shown to be involved in the process of inflammation, wound healing, and cartilage development; and its role in the progression of breast and ovarian cancer is also well established.
In this paper, we aimed to explore whether progranulin (PGRN) could induce epithelial ovarian cancer cells to undergo an epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) program directly and through its activation of cancer associated fibroblasts (CAFs) indirectly.
Immunohistochemistry(IHC) staining of tissue samples of 78 cases of epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) patients found that PGRN expression levels were negatively correlated with E-cadherin levels (r=-0.289, P=0.013) and positively correlated with Slug levels (r=0.332, P=0.003); Cell experiments showed that PGRN overexpression could increase the migratory and invasive abilities of A2780 cells significantly.
The pharmacokinetics (PK) and therapeutic effect of 2P-EPI (Mw ~100 kDa) were determined in mice bearing human ovarian carcinoma A2780 xenografts.
Here we aimed to investigate the diagnostic value of the levels of the growth factor Granulin, which has been associated with epithelial ovarian carcinoma, in the pathogenesis of POF.
Overexpression of progranulin (also named acrogranin, PC-cell-derived growth factor, or granulin-epithelin precursor) is associated with ovarian cancer, specifically with cell proliferation, malignancy, chemoresistance, and shortened overall survival.
The objective of the current study is to identify the signaling pathways involved in the regulation of progranulin expression in ovarian cancer cell lines.
We studied the relation of protein kinase C (PKC), phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, protein kinase A, P38, extracellular signal-regulated kinase, and Akt pathways on the modulation of progranulin expression levels in NIH-OVCAR-3 and SK-OV-3 ovarian cancer cell lines.
Inhibition of PKC signal transduction pathway by calphostin C decreased in a dose-dependent manner protein but not mRNA levels of progranulin in both ovarian cancer cell lines.
These results suggest that the PKC signaling is involved in the regulation of progranulin protein expression in 2 different ovarian cancer cell lines.
Inhibiting these intracellular signal transduction pathways may provide a future therapeutic target for hindering the cellular proliferation and invasion in ovarian cancer produced by progranulin.
It has been recently demonstrated that progranulin is overexpressed in ovarian cancer and that this protein is involved in the stimulation of cell proliferation, malignancy, and chemoresistance in ovarian cancer.
The goal of the present study was to establish the differences in progranulin expression among normal, benign, and malignant ovarian tissues and to identify the signal transduction pathways activated by progranulin in an ovarian cancer cell line.
Progranulin expression may be potentially involved in the pathogenesis and malignant progression of ovarian cancer, and thus may represent a therapeutic target for this particular malignancy.
To investigate the inhibitory effects of an antisense PC cell derived growth factor (PCDGF) vector on proliferation and invasion of highly malignant ovarian cancer cell lines Sw626 and A2780 cells, and preliminarily explore the related mechanisms.
The antisense PCDGF vector may inhibit markedly the proliferation and invasion of highly malignant ovarian cancer cells, and partially reverses their malignant phenotype.
Our findings indicate that PCDGF may become a new target for antisense gene therapy of ovarian cancer.
Similarly, specific programs dedicated to social cognitive training such as Social Cognition and Interaction Training (SCIT), Reasoning and Rehabilitation Mental Health Program (R&amp;R2 MHP) and Metacognitive Training (MCT) have shown their positive impact on the control and reduction of global aggressive attitudes and on the numbers of physical and verbal aggressive incidents in schizophrenia.
Protein aggregates are hallmarks of nearly all age-related neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and several polyglutamine diseases such as Huntington's disease and different forms of spinocerebellar ataxias (SCA; SCA1-3, SCA6, and SCA7).
The assessment in haemostasis system, fibrinogen, tissue plasminogen activator (t-PA) and its inhibitor type-1, von Willebrand factor and beta-thromboglobulin (beta-TG) levels and the changes in renin-angiotensin system (RAS), by determined angiotensin converting enzyme I (ACE) activity, in patients with essential hypertension (in relation to left ventricular hypertrophy) in comparison with normotension subjects.
In patients with essential hypertension, increased level of platelet activity expressed as the concentrations of beta-thromboglobulin (beta-TG) and platelet factor 4 (PF4) were observed.
To evaluate the effect of antihypertensive therapy on platelet activation in essential hypertension, the plasma levels of beta-thromboglobulin (beta-TG) were examined in 45 patients with essential hypertension and 20 age-matched normotensive control subjects.
The MKP-3 is known as the main Erk1/2 phosphatase and FoxO1 activator, which has repercussions on the gluconeogenesis pathway and hyperglycemia in obese mice.
However, the hypothalamic interaction between MKP-3 and FoxO1 during obesity was not investigated yet.
The results indicate that obesity in mice increased the MKP-3 protein content in the hypothalamus.
Taken together, our study reports that obesity is associated with increased protein levels of hypothalamic MKP-3, which is related to the reduction of FoxO1 and Erk1/2 phosphorylation in the hypothalamus as well as to an increase in body weight and a reduction in energy expenditure.
Nevertheless, after 26 weeks of high-fat diet exposure, we observed comparable body weight, fat and lean mass in DUSP6 WT and KO mice, suggesting overall normal susceptibility to develop obesity.
Our data are in conflict to earlier reports that propose protection from diet-induced obesity and glucose intolerance in DUSP6 deficient mice.
Thus, the role of MKP-3 in the hypothalamus is closely associated with FoxO1 dephosphorylation and may provide a potential therapeutic target against hypothalamic disorders related to obesity and unbalanced food intake control.
Dusp6-deficient mice have been shown to be resistant to diet-induced obesity, but the mechanism behind this remains unclear.
16S ribosomal RNA gene analysis demonstrated that dusp6-deficient mice harbour unique gut microbiota with resistance to diet-induced-obesity-mediated alteration of the gut microbiome.
This study demonstrates that dusp6 deficiency is a strong genetic factor shaping gut microbiota, and that it confers obesity protection by ameliorating the gut microbiota response to diet-mediated stress.
In recent, it was reported that MKP3 deficient mice are resistant to diet-induced obesity, and display enhanced energy expenditure.
Our laboratory recently demonstrated that MKP-3 plays an important role in obesity-related hyperglycemia by promoting hepatic glucose output.
This study shows that MKP-3 deficiency attenuates body weight gain induced by a high-fat diet (HFD) and protects mice from developing obesity-related hepatosteatosis.
We investigated Beta-defensin family expression in liver cancer in publicly available datasets and found that among all the Beta-defensins tested, only Beta-defensin 1 was significantly downregulated, suggesting Beta-defensin 1 plays a crucial role in liver cancer development.
Furthermore, the downregulation of Beta-defensin 1 and E-cadherin, and upregulation of hepatocyte growth factor-regulated tyrosine kinase substrate, were further confirmed in liver cancer and adjacent normal tissue collected from in-house Chinese liver cancer patients.
Together, our results suggest Beta-defensin 1 plays an important role in protecting HCV progression and liver cancer development.
mRNA expression of the AMPs Alfa defensin (HNP-1); cathelicidin (LL-37); and Beta defensins (hBD-1, hBD-2, hBD-3, hBD-4) in human uveal and cutaneous melanoma cell lines, primary human uveal melanocytes, and primary human uveal melanoma cells was determined by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction.
Moreover, BPC supplementation restored pancreatitis mediated disruption of intestinal barrier integrity by upregulating tight junction proteins (ZO-1, occludin), antimicrobial peptides (DEFB1, CRAMP), MUC-2, TFF3 expression and by enhancing SCFA's production.
The aim of this study was to investigate the shared molecular pathways of obesity and cancer by exploring the role of RIZ1 in obesity and the phospatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/V-Akt murine thymoma viral oncogene homolog (PKB) (AKT)/mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway.
The results identify RIZ1 as an important regulator of both Akt3 transcription and AKT phosphorylation and suggest a role for RIZ1 in HF-induced obesity and the AKT pathway.
To examine the function of C8bp in platelets, we tested platelets from patients suffering from paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH).
These anti-idiotypic antisera were shown to react against an overlapping epitope(s) on C8bp/HRF as indicated by the following evidence: (i) all three types of antisera reacted against partially purified C8bp/HRF and against a 65 kDa protein band in cell lysates; reactivity was only observed against disulfide-reduced antigens; (ii) the three antibodies react with a protein band in normal erythrocytes (E) but not with type III E of patients with paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria or with a mutant B lymphoblastoid cell line, both of which cell types are known to be deficient in C8bp/HRF; and (iii) the three antibodies compete with each other for binding to C8bp/HRF.
Lack of C8bp as seen in patients with paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria type III results in enhanced susceptibility of the cells toward C5b-9.
The main band of fibromodulin had a normal migration rate in fibrochondrogenesis, Desbuquois dysplasia, Kniest dysplasia, and pseudoachondroplasia.
Ablation of both genes in Ezh1-/-::Ezh2f/f::cTNT-Cre embryos caused lethal heart malformations, including hypertrabeculation, compact myocardial hypoplasia, and ventricular septal defect.
In myocardial infarction performed outside of the neonatal regenerative window, EZH1 but not EZH2 likewise improved heart function and stimulated cardiac myocyte proliferation.
In this study, we investigated the effects of homocysteine (Hcy) on the expression of enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), and tested our hypothesis that Hcy-induced atherosclerosis is mediated by increased EZH2 expression, which is regulated by miR-92a.
These data suggested that EZH2 plays a key role in Hcy-mediated lipid metabolism disorders, and that miR-92a may be a novel therapeutic target in Hcy-related atherosclerosis.
Here, we analyzed the expression of Six1 and its regulating factor Ezh2 in cardiac tissue of patients with end-stage dilative cardiomyopathy (DCM).
Polycomb protein EZH2 induced DNMT1 expression and methyl-CpG-binding protein-2 (MeCP2) recruitment, and stimulated the binding of DNMT1 and MeCP2 to ABCA1 promoter, thereby promoting ABCA1 gene DNA methylation and atherosclerosis.
Conversely, EZH2 overexpression stimulated DNMT1-induced ABCA1 gene promoter methylation and atherosclerosis.
EZH2-induced downregulation of ABCA1 gene expression promotes foam cell formation and the development of atherosclerosis by DNA methylation of ABCA1 gene promoter.
The expression levels of E-cadherin were reduced, and those of snail family zinc finger 1, fibronectin, Alfa-smooth muscle actin and fibroblast secretory protein 1 increased in esophageal cancer cells following treatment with human recombinant EMMPRIN under hypoxic conditions.
A total of 17 adults (age, 57-85 years) with symmetrical sensorineural hearing loss were tested in the sound field using hearing aids fit to target (NAL-NL2).
The National Acoustic Laboratories-Nonlinear 2 (NAL-NL2) prescription of amplification was chosen because audibility is intentionally not prescribed in the presence of larger sensorineural hearing loss thresholds.
The binding ability of thirteen lectins, AAL, LCA, LTL, ConA, NML, NPL, DBA, HAL, PTL II, WFL, ECL, GSL II and PHA-L to glycan were elevated, and a definite indication that glycan containing terminal AlfaFuc and +/- Sia-Le, core fucose, Alfa-man, gal-Beta(Alfa) GalNAc, Beta1,6 GlcNAc branching and tetraantennary complex oligosaccharides structures were increased.
Hearing aids fitted based on the DSL v5 procedure would seem to be more appropriate than the NAL-NL1 procedure for children with moderately severe to profound sensorineural hearing loss, at least in quiet listening environments.
Although alleles in the TMEM182 gene did not show significant association with glaucoma in the second round, subjects with the A/A allele in TMEM182 rs869833 showed worse visual field mean deviation (p=0.01).
Given the association between GKD and type 2 diabetes mellitus, it is interesting that the mother had gestational diabetes while carrying an affected fetus.
Further investigations may help elucidate the role of GKD in the carrier mother's gestational diabetes.
Glycerol kinase (GK) is at the interface of fat and carbohydrate metabolism and has been implicated in insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes mellitus.
This study elucidates the complex network of glycerol kinase and further confirms a possible role for glycerol kinase deficiency, a simple Mendelian disorder, in insulin resistance, and type 2 diabetes mellitus, a common complex genetic disorder.
Mutations in the GK gene result in a rare inborn error of metabolism, GK deficiency (GKD), and at least one of these mutations (N288D) is associated with insulin resistance and diabetes mellitus.
In an attempt to identify potential modifiers of the GKD phenotype, and to elucidate better the relationship between GKD and diabetes mellitus, we investigated the GK promoter.
The involvement of both GK and HNF-4alpha in the etiology of diabetes mellitus is intriguing, and we speculate that HNF-4alpha represents a potential modifier of the GKD phenotype.
p120 (CagA), p33, p30 (OMP), and p19 (OMP) seropositivity was more often present in patients with higher grades of the histological parameters of gastritis and seropositivity to protein p95 (VacA) with endoscopic presence of duodenal ulcer.
In the present report, we use a mouse model of bone cancer pain and examine whether oral administration of a selective small molecule Trk inhibitor (ARRY-470, which blocks TrkA, TrkB and TrkC kinase activity at low nm concentrations) has a significant effect on cancer-induced pain behaviors, tumor-induced remodeling of sensory nerve fibers, tumor growth and tumor-induced bone remodeling.
Modulation of myostatin levels and myostatin/HGF balance by the use of different HD modalities might represent a novel approach to the prevention and treatment of HD-related muscle wasting syndrome.
Hgf is also a known downstream target of Gata4 and it has been demonstrated that the expression of Hgf was significantly downregulated in PPF cells of Gata4 knockouts with congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH).
In vaccinia cutaneous-infected mice, DNGR-1-mediated crosspresentation was required for optimal Trm cell priming but not for their skin differentiation or for circulating memory T cell generation.
The aim of this study was to assess the association between the TNFR1 rs2234649 polymorphism and ankylosing spondylitis susceptibility in a Russian Caucasian population.
To discover how NLRP3 and TNFRSF1A polymorphisms affect the efficacy of traditional medicine and etanercept for ankylosing spondylitis (AS) patients.
The effects of the TNF- Alfa blockers infliximab or etanercept on the levels of TNF- Alfa , TNF-receptor 1 (TNF-R1), and TNF-receptor 2 (TNF-R2), as well as the levels of the inflammation markers CRP and IL-6, were measured in ankylosing spondylitis (AS) and rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients receiving treatment with either compound.
To replicate the possible genetic association between ankylosing spondylitis (AS) and TNFRSF1A.
The objective of this study was to evaluate the differences in allele and genotype frequencies of -383 tumor necrosis factor receptor 1 (TNFR1) polymorphism between ankylosing spondylitis (AS) and controls.
Here we report the identification of three variants in the RUNX3, LTBR-TNFRSF1A and IL12B regions convincingly associated with ankylosing spondylitis (P &lt; 5 x 10(-8) in the combined discovery and replication datasets) and a further four loci at PTGER4, TBKBP1, ANTXR2 and CARD9 that show strong association across all our datasets (P &lt; 5 x 10(-6) overall, with support in each of the three datasets studied).
Obtained results indicate that miR-30a-5p, miR-126-3p and miR-486-5p are downregulated, while miR-205-5p and miR-210-3p are upregulated in NSCLC tissue.
Moreover, performed stepwise discriminant analysis determined the model including miR-30a-5p and miR-210-3p which tested on the test set (n= 30) revealed an AUC of 0.969 and provided 100% sensitivity and 80% specificity in discriminating NSCLC tissue from non-cancerous lung tissue.
Moreover, miR-30a-5p together with miR-210-3p with excellent sensitivity and acceptable specificity may distinguish cancer tissue form non-cancerous tissue and thus may become a potential diagnostic biomarker for NSCLC.
We performed this meta-analysis to provide a comprehensive evaluation of the role of MicroRNA-210 (miR-210) expression on the overall survival (OS) rate of cancers.
We searched for relevant available literatures on miR-210 and cancer until November 1st, 2016 on the databases PubMed, EMBASE, Cochrane Library, and Science Direct database.
Subgroup analysis was performed to evaluate the specific role of miR-210 in ethnicity and the type of cancers.
The present meta-analysis suggests that high expressed miR-210 is significantly associated with OS in cancer patients, which has the potential to be a prognostic marker in cancers.
The roles of miR-210 in rat adrenal gland pheochromocytoma (PC-12) cells remain unknown.
The number of pleural tumor foci, the volume of pleural effusion, the LMVD and the VEGF-C expression levels in the tumor tissue were significantly reduced in the H-ITCZ-treated group.
We assessed the mRNA expression of VEGF, VEGF type C (VEGF-C) and their receptors together with the microvessel density (VD) and microlymphatic vessel density (LVD) in pursuit of their connection and prognostic value in malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM).
In this study, we detected the role of miR-132 in development and progression of pancreatic cancer and the underlying mechanism.
First, the expression of miR-132 in pancreatic carcinoma and adjacent non-cancerous tissues were detected by qRT-PCR.
Then, the role of miR-132 in biological function of pancreatic carcinoma cells was investigated.
Our results identified that miR-132 was generally upregulated in pancreatic carcinoma, and phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) was generally downregulated.
miR-132 and PTEN were associated with advanced tumor size, lymph node metastasis and Tumor-Nodes-Metastases (TNM) stage of pancreatic carcinoma.
Downregulation of miR-132 inhibited proliferation, migration and invasion of pancreatic carcinoma cells.
In contrast, overexpression of miR-132 promoted proliferation, migration and invasion of pancreatic carcinoma cells.
Overexpression of PTEN abrogated the induction of miR-132 on proliferation, migration and invasion of pancreatic carcinoma cells.
Taken together, miR-132 promotes the proliferation, invasion and migration of human pancreatic cancer by inhibition of PTEN, and could be a tumor oncogene in development and progression of pancreatic carcinoma, and might be a candidate prognostic biomarker and a promising target for new treatment of human pancreatic cancer.
Although miR-132 has been studied in various human tumors, few studies have investigated the role of miR-132 in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
To investigate the effects of co-transfection of miR-520c-3p and miR-132 on proliferation and apoptosis of hepatocellular carcinoma Huh7.
Hepatocellular carcinoma Huh7 was cultured in vitro and lipidosome was used to transfect miR-520c-3p and miR-132, respectively or together.
The co-transfection of miR-520c-3p and miR-132 can target-regulate the expression of GPC3 and YAP, enhance the exhibition effect on proliferation of hepatocellular carcinoma Huh7 and induce cell apoptosis synergistically.
Paired and single cell line analyses under these experimental conditions identified TATA-Box Binding Protein (TBP) and Importin 8 (IPO8) to be stable in non-small cell lung cancer.
Thus, we evaluated the effect of serum availability on the expression of commonly used HKG (ACTB, B2M, GAPDH, GUSB, HPRT1, IPO8, MRPL19, PGK1, PPIA, RPLP0, RPS23, SDHA, TBP, UBC, and YWHAZ) in seven colon adenocarcinoma cell lines (Caco-2, DLD-1, HCT116, HT29, Lovo, SW480, and SW620).
The use of MRPL19, IPO8 and PPIA was identified as the best reference gene combination for the normalization of gene expression levels in endometrial carcinoma.
Expression stability of 15 HKG (ACTB, B2M, GAPDH, GUSB, HPRT1, IPO8, MRPL19, PGK1, PPIA, RPLP0, RPS23, SDHA, TBP, UBC, and YWHAZ) in 166 bowel specimens (91 normal, 35 cancerous, and 40 inflamed) was ranked by coefficients of variation (CV%) or using dedicated software: geNorm and NormFinder.
The RPS23, PPIA, and RPLP0 were top-ranked, whereas IPO8, UBC and TBP were the lowest-ranked HKG across inflamed/cancerous/normal colonic tissues.
With respect to 14 of the 15 common reference genes (B2M, GAPDH, GUSB, HMBS, HPRT1, IPO8, PGK1, POLR2A, PPIA, RPLP0, TBP, TFRC, UBC, and YWHAZ), the expression levels were either too low to be easily detected, or exhibited a high degree of variability either between lung normal and squamous-cell carcinoma samples, or even among samples of the same tissue type.
After 4 weeks of CPAP therapy, there were no significant differences in ESS (PSG 6.4 +/- 3.8 vs home monitoring [HM] 6.5 +/- 3.8, P = .71), PSQI (PSG 5.4 +/- 3.1 vs HM 6.2 +/- 3.4, P = .30), SAQLI (PSG 4.5 +/- 1.1 vs HM 4.6 +/- 1.1, P = .85), SF-36 vitality (PSG 62.2 +/- 23.3 vs HM 64.1 +/- 18.4, P = .79), SF-36 HM (PSG 84.0 +/- 10.4 vs HM 81.3 +/- 14.9, P = .39), and BP (PSG 129/84 +/- 11/0 vs HM 125/81 +/- 13/9, P = .121).
Thus, we propose that serum MMP-7 (alone or in combination with GGT) is a diagnostic biomarker for biliary atresia and may serve as a therapeutic target.
We aimed to evaluate the diagnostic value of anti-smooth muscle antibodies (ASMA) and two liver markers (gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase [GGT] and alkaline phosphatase [ALP]) for differentiating between patients with extrahepatic biliary atresia (EHBA) and idiopathic neonatal hepatitis (INH).
In univariate analyses, gallbladder size, triangular cord sign, spleen size and ARFI values were found to be associated with biliary atresia, though only the triangular cord sign remained significant when elevated gamma glutamyltransferase (GGT) was included as a predictor.
Here we sought to determine whether YY1 is upregulated in the cervical cancer tissues and YY1 inhibition contributes to apoptosis of cervical cancer cells, which is at least partly p53 dependent.
Therefore, YY1 can be a potential therapeutic target for cervical cancer treatment by arsenic trioxide (As2O3).
The expression level of YY1 was examined and analyzed by Western blot in pathologically confirmed primary cervical cancer samples, in the adjacent normal samples, as well as in normal cervix samples.
Treatment of HeLa cells with As2O3, a known anti-cervical cancer agent, reduced both protein and mRNA levels of YY1 in HeLa cells.
These results demonstrated that the expression of YY1 is upregulated in cervical carcinomas and that YY1 plays a critical role in the progression of HPV-positive cervical cancer.
Thus, YY1 is an As2O3 target and could serve as a potential drug sensitizer for anti-cervical cancer therapy.
VEGF and TGF-beta1 mRNA overexpression was found to be associated with progression from low-grade to high-grade cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN), while YY1 showed constitutively elevated transcript levels in CIN and cervical cancer compared to controls.
Comparison of the two groups revealed that isolates from cervical cancers predominantly carry changes in sequences of YY1 binding sites (especially at nucleotide 7519), while variants from asymptomatic carriers contained nucleotide changes within or close to transcription binding sites for AP-1, Oct-1, NF1, Tef-1, Tef-2, Sp1, YY1 and viral E2.
Significant positive genetic correlations were observed between anorexia nervosa and schizophrenia, neuroticism, educational attainment, and high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, and significant negative genetic correlations were observed between anorexia nervosa and body mass index, insulin, glucose, and lipid phenotypes.
Diabulimia is an eating disorder specific to patients with diabetes characterized by limiting and/or skipping insulin dosing.
The purpose of this study was to investigate eating patterns among male and female adolescents with type 1 diabetes (T1D), and the associations with age, zBMI, eating disorder (ED) pathology, intentional insulin omission, and metabolic control.
Since to date, there are no available studies on serum vaspin concentrations in patients with anorexia nervosa (AN), the aim of our study is to assess serum vaspin concentrations in girls with AN in comparison to healthy subjects and determine its relationship with body weight, body masss index (BMI) and insulin.
[3H]FLT uptake after 5-fluorouracil treatment in vitro and [18F]FLT uptake after capecitabine (360 mg/kg/day) in athymic nude mice (Balb/c-nu) with xenografts (n = 10-12 per group) were measured using eight human colon cancer cell lines.
This retrospective study was done to examine whether the heterogeneity in primary tumor F-18-fluorodeoxyglucose (18F-FDG) and 18F-3'-fluoro-3'-deoxythymidine (18F-FLT) distribution can predict prognosis of patients with colorectal cancer who received surgery.
The enrolled 32 patients with colorectal cancer underwent both 18F-FDG- and 18F-FLT-PET/CT studies before surgery.
18F-FDG PET heterogeneity parameters, IV and SZV, have a potential to be strong prognostic factors to predict PFS of patients with surgically resected colorectal cancer and are more useful than 18F-FLT-PET/CT heterogeneity parameters.
Our previous studies in colorectal cancer (CRC) cells have demonstrated an intracrine VEGF/VEGFR1 signalling mechanism that mediates CRC cell survival and chemo-sensitivity.
We tested whether variation in three serum biomarkers such as the natural c-MET ligand (hepatocyte growth factor), soluble vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 1, and vascular endothelial growth factor-A was associated with efficacy in metastatic colorectal cancer patients treated in the prospective BECOX study.
Serum levels of vascular endothelial growth factor-A165, soluble vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 1, and hepatocyte growth factor were assessed by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay method basally and every 3 cycles (at the time of computed tomography evaluation) in a preplanned translational study in the first-line BECOX trial in metastatic colorectal cancer patients treated with CAPOX plus bevacizumab.
Additionally, fisetin downregulated VEGFR1, p-ERK1/2, p38 and pJNK, ameliorating liver cancer progression.
Two hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines (Hep3B and HepG2) were screened for expression of VEGF by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and its receptors VEGF-R1, VEGF-R2, and neuropilin-1 expression by reverse transcriptase-PCR, respectively.
In addition, there was also an 8.43 Mb deletion in the 4p16.1p16.3 region, which involved FGFR3, LETM1, WHSC1 and WHSC2 and other 64 OMIM genes and spanned the Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome region.
Multiple linear regression analysis revealed plasma miR-133a and its myocardial target Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome candidate 2/Negative elongation factor A as opposite predictors of the LV mass loss (g) after AVR.
The second case which had an interstitial microdeletion encompassing WHSC 1 and WHSC 2 genes at 4p16.3 presented with less striking clinical features of WHS and had an apparently "normal" karyotype.
Employing a unique panel of patient-derived cell lines with differing-sized 4p deletions, we provide evidence that haploinsufficiency of SLBP and/or WHSC2 (NELF-A) contributes to several novel cellular phenotypes of WHS, including delayed progression from S-phase into M-phase, reduced DNA replication in asynchronous culture and altered higher order chromatin assembly.
The microduplication did not involve WHSC1 and WHSC2 which are considered in the critical region for WHS and trisomy 4p.
Using multiple linear regression analysis, an equation was developed (adjusted R^2=0.73; p&lt;0.0001) that included positive [preoperative LVM, microRNA-133a, serum response factor (SRF, which is known to be a transactivator of miR-133) and age] and negative [body mass index (BMI), Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome candidate-2 (WHSC2, which is a target for repression by miR-133a), Beta-myosin heavy chain, myosin light chain-2, diabetes mellitus, and male gender] independent predictors of LVM reduction.
Therefore, we propose that overexpression of candidate genes in WHS (WHSC1, WHSC2 and LETM1) due to a duplication causes a clinical entity different to both the WHS and 4p trisomy syndrome.
The smallest deletion detected in a WHS patient thus far includes two candidate genes, WHSC1 and WHSC2.
Starting from making a connection between the syndrome phenotype and cytogenetic abnormalities, through gradual shortening of the length of the critical region WHSCR (finally up to 165 kb), and sequencing it, at least 2 genes (WHSC1 and WHSC2) were identified.
The deletion encompasses 191.5 kb and includes WHSC2, but not LETM1.
The association of GS with haemolytic anemias, e.g., Hereditary Spherocytosis (HS) or Congenital Dyserythropoietic Anemia type 2 (CDA 2), increase the hyperbilirubinemia level and the risk of cholelithiasis.
A case of a woman with congenital dyserythropoietic anemia type II (CDA-II), Gilbert's syndrome (GS) and trophic malleolar ulceration is described.
We show that the combined effect of an increased bilirubin load caused by dyserythropoiesis in CDA II and decreased bilirubin conjugation caused by reduced expression of uridine diphosphate glucuronosyl transferase (UGT1A) would increase the risk of hyperbilirubinemia (P &lt;.005) and gallstone formation (chi(2): P &lt;.
We also noted that the nonphosphorylatable mutant Vgll4-4A (S58A/S155A/T159A/S280A) suppressed tumorigenesis in pancreatic cancer cells in vitro and in vivo to a greater extent than did wild-type Vgll4, suggesting that mitotic phosphorylation inhibits Vgll4's tumor-suppressive activity.
Here, we report that diminished VGLL4 expression, but not VGLL1-3, correlated with both shorter relapse-free survival and shorter disease-specific survival of cancer patients with different molecular subtypes of breast cancer.
Additionally, we further demonstrate that overexpression of VGLL4 reduces breast cancer cell proliferation, migration, intravasation/extravasation potential, favors cell death, and suppresses tumor growth in vivo.
VGLL4 may be a promising therapeutic target in breast cancer.
Further investigation in the prostate cancer cohort revealed that gene expression of SERPINA, STX7, PDIA2, FMP5, GP1BB, VGLL4, KCNMA1, SHMT2, SAA4 and DIDO1 influence the prognostic significance of TWIST and vice versa.
The expression of VGLL4 is significantly downregulated in clinical colorectal carcinoma (CRC) specimens, positively associated with patient survival rate, and inversely correlated with the expression of Wnt target genes in CRCs.
Gastric cancer (GC) is one of the most common malignant tumors and recent data demonstrates the tumor suppressor role of VGLL4 in GC, but the mechanisms for VGLL4 downregulation in GC remain to be elucidated.
In the present study, we investigated the effect of NGB overexpression on survival as well as on the size and occurrence of myocardial infarctions (MI) in a mouse model of acute MI (AMI) and a model of advanced atherosclerosis (ApoE -/- Fbn1 C1039G+/- mice), in which coronary plaques and MI develop in mice being fed a Western-type diet.
Because apolipoprotein deficient mice with a heterozygous mutation (C1039G+/-) in the fibrillin-1 gene (ApoE-/-Fbn1C1039G+/-) manifest substantial IP neovascularization, they represent a unique tool to further investigate angiogenesis and its role in atherosclerosis.
Although lack of a valuable animal model of IP neovascularization impeded the investigation of a causal and straightforward link between neovascularization and atherosclerosis, recent evidence shows that vein grafts in ApoE*3 Leiden mice as well as plaques in ApoE(-/-) Fbn1(C1039G+/-) mice are useful models for intraplaque neovessel research.
We recently reported that apolipoprotein E (ApoE)-deficient mice with a mutation in the fibrillin-1 gene (ApoE(-/-)Fbn1(C1039G+/-)) develop accelerated atherosclerosis with enhanced inflammation, atherosclerotic plaque rupture, myocardial infarction and sudden death.
In addition, we found a genomic deletion encompassing MAP1B in one patient with intellectual disability, microcephaly and seizures and deletions encompassing MYO16 in two unrelated patients with intellectual disability, autism and microcephaly.
Furthermore, PBMCs miR-122, -720, and -3149 were increased in the AMI patients compared with the unstable angina (UA) patients (all P &lt; 0.05).
The aim of this study is to determine the prognostic value of miR-122-5p in a large cohort of comatose survivors of out-of-hospital cardiac arrest.
Circulating levels of miR-122-5p improve the prediction of outcome after out-of-hospital cardiac arrest.
The resected specimen showed schwannoma histology, with tumor cells expressing S100 protein and WT1.
SIRT1 immunoreactivity was reviewed in a series of 164 soft tissue tumors including alveolar soft part sarcoma, angiomyolipoma, clear cell sarcoma, desmoid/fibromatosis, desmoplastic small round cell tumor, Ewing sarcoma, gastrointestinal stromal tumor, glomus tumor, leiomyoma, leiomyosarcoma, lipoma, liposarcoma, malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor, nodular fasciitis, osteosarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, schwannoma, solitary fibrous tumor, synovial sarcoma, undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma, and Wilms tumor.
We analyze the immunohistochemical expression of WT1 in 101 samples consisting of 13 normal nerves, 10 neurofibromas, 69 schwannomas and 9 malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNST).
In 50 vestibular schwannomas tumor growth extension was correlated to WT1 expression.
In peripheral nerve sheath tumors, cytoplasmic WT1 protein is expressed in the cytoplasm of the neoplastic cells in all tumors, including MPNST, neurofibromas and schwannomas.
The authors report a case of multiple intra-dural schwannomas of the conus medullaris expressing HIF-1, galectin-3, cox-2 and Wilms tumor-1 protein; which to the best of our knowledge has not been previously reported in schwanomatosis.
Within the group of tumors that express a dominant or occasional small round cell pattern "SRCT" (neoplasms of the Central Nervous System excluded) are included: Ewing's sarcoma and peripheral neuroectodermal tumor (Es/pPNET) comprising its varieties, neuroblastoma, desmoplastic small round cell tumor, rhabdomyosarcoma, alveolar, solid and embryonal, small cell osteosarcoma, chondrosarcoma, myxoid and mesenchymal, round cell and myxoid liposarcoma, synovial sarcoma (monophasic undiffentiated), primitive malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor (malignant small cell schwannoma), malignant non-Hogdkin lymphoma, Merkel cell tumor of the skin (small cell carcinoma including neuroendocrine carcinoma).
The main differential diagnosis includes hypertrophic scar, dermatofibroma (fibrous histiocytoma), pilar leiomyoma, neurofibroma, adult myofibromatosis, extra-abdominal fibromatosis and plaque-stage dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans.
Data from patients with histiocytomas displaying induction of pilar epithelium in the epidermis above the lesions was compared with data from controls who did not show this change.
Serial sectioning of histiocytomas showed that the induction of pilar epithelium was a focal phenomenon, often missed in routine sections.
Bile acids deactivate certain enzymes, such as prolyl endopeptidases (PEPs), which are investigated as candidates for protease-based therapy for celiac sprue.
To establish the proof of principle, the assay was applied to proline-specific endopeptidases (PEPs), a group of enzymes recently proposed as adjuvant therapy for celiac disease (a highly prevalent immunogenetic enteropathy).
Due to their unique ability to cleave immunotoxic gluten peptides endoproteolytically, prolyl endopeptidases (PEPs) are attractive oral therapeutic candidates for protecting celiac sprue patients from the toxic effects of dietary gluten.
The purpose of this study was to assess IL-37 profile in acute coronary syndrome (ACS) and the prognostic role of this cytokine in patients with ST-segment elevation acute myocardial infarction (STEMI) undergoing primary percutaneous coronary intervention (PPCI).
Plasma interleukin-37 levels were measured in 41 patients with ST elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI), 41 patients with non-STEMI, 42 patients with unstable angina, and 40 controls.
However, the exact role of IL-37 and IL-37 plus troponin I (TnI)-treated dendritic cells (DCs) in ventricular remodeling after myocardial infarction (MI) remains elusive.
Transgenic mice expressing human IL-37 (IL37-tg) exhibit less severe inflammation in models of endotoxin shock, colitis, myocardial infarction, lung, and spinal cord injury.
To investigate the temporal changes of serum interleukin-37 (IL-37) concentration following acute ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (ASTEMI) and the relationship between IL-37 and C-reactive protein (CRP) in patients with ASTEMI.
Venous blood was collected at days 1, 3, 5, and 7 after myocardial infarction for measurement of serum IL-37 and CRP levels using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
Compared with the control group, the patients in ASTEMI group showed a significant acute elevation of IL-37 level on day 1 following myocardial infarction; IL-37 level reached the peak on day 3 and began to decrease on day 5, followed by a significant decrease on day 7.
A recent study found that IL-37 elevated significantly in peripheral blood of patients with acute myocardial infarction.
We aimed to explore the effect IL-37 on cardiac function after mice myocardial infarction (MI) and its mechanism.
However, the plasma levels of IL-37 in patients with acute coronary syndrome (ACS, including unstable angina pectoris and acute myocardial infarction) have yet to be investigated.
Plasma IL-37, IL-18, and IL-18BP levels were measured in 50 patients with stable angina pectoris (SAP), 75 patients with unstable angina pectoris (UAP), 67 patients with acute myocardial infarction (AMI), and 65 control patients.
This mutation is normally associated with a mild to moderate course of Becker muscular dystrophy but the father suffered from a severe course of Becker muscular dystrophy suggesting MYF6 as a modifier.
The ratio of FA values within the cerebral peduncles of the affected and unaffected hemispheres (rFA) was calculated for each patient (n = 40) and assessed for correlation with Brunnstrom stage (BRS, 1-6), motor component of the functional independence measure (FIM-motor, 13-91), and the total length of stay (LOS) until discharge from rehabilitation (P &lt; .05).
Correlation coefficients were statistically significant between rFA and shoulder/elbow/forearm BRS (.696), hand BRS (.779), lower extremity BRS (.631), FIM-motor (.442), and LOS (-.598).
Ratios between FA values in the affected and unaffected hemispheres (rFA) were assessed by BRS and FIM-motor scores.
Analysis revealed significant relationships between rFA and BRS data (correlation coefficient: .687 for shoulder/elbow/forearm, .579 for hand, and .623 for lower extremities) but no significance relationship between rFA and FIM-motor scores.
In contrast, analysis of rFA and FIM-motor scores did not reveal statistical significance.
Submucous cleft palate (SMCP) classically involves bifid uvula, zona pellucida, and notched hard palate.
Validate an assessment protocol for diagnosis of occult submucous cleft palate (OSMCP) and identify physical examination features present in patients with OSMCP in the relaxed and activated palate positions.
This study aimed to evaluate the craniofacial morphology of unoperated adult submucous cleft palate (SMCP) patients and to explore the possible correlation between the intrinsic growth insufficiency of the maxillofacial complex and the severity of the cleft.
A total of 20 unoperated SMCP patients, 20 unoperated overt cleft palate (OCP) patients, and 32 normal controls, ages between 18 and 30, were included for cephalometric analysis.
Because some patients with submucous cleft palate (SMCP) are asymptomatic, surgical treatment is conventionally delayed until hypernasal resonance is identified during speech production.
Since 69% of individuals with 22q11.2 deletion have a palatal abnormality, we studied the prevalence of 22q11.2 deletion syndrome in 378 Iranian patients during a 5-year period, including 291 patients affected with cleft palate only without cleft lip (CPO) and 87 patients affected with velopharyngeal incompetence (VPI) and/or submucous cleft palate (SMCP).
Submucous cleft palate (SMCP) is a relatively rare variant of the common pathology of cleft palate with specific anatomic and clinical features.
In this study, 366 patients with VPD were retrospectively stratified into cleft lip and palate (CLP), cleft palate (CP), submucous cleft palate (SMCP), occult submucous cleft palate (OSMCP), and non-CP groups.
The postoperative speech outcomes of submucous cleft palate (SMCP) surgery are known to be poorer than those of other types of cleft palate.
We attempted to objectively characterize the postoperative complications and speech outcomes of the surgical treatment of SMCP through a comparison with the outcomes of incomplete cleft palate (ICP).
The aim of this study was to visualize bony defects of the palate and vomer in submucous cleft palate patients (SMCP) by three-dimensional (3D) computed tomography (CT) reconstruction and to classify the range of bony defects.
Objective : Submucous cleft palate (SMCP) is a congenital condition associated with abnormal development of the soft palate musculature.
Adrenomedullin (ADM) is closely related to calcitonin gene-related peptide, which has a known causative role in migraine.
1-Piperidinecarboxamide, N-[2-[[5-amino-l-[[4-(4-pyridinyl)-l-piperazinyl]carbonyl]pentyl]amino]-1-[(3,5-dibromo-4-hydroxyphenyl)methyl]-2-oxoethyl]-4-(1,4-dihydro-2-oxo-3(2H)-quinazolinyl) (BIBN4096BS), a calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) receptor antagonist, can alleviate the symptoms of migraine and is highly selective for CGRP over adrenomedullin (AM) receptors.
The study of the determination of the DME/S is then performed in subjects with normal MEVS/VC X 100 and clinically suspect of bronchial obstruction (tobacco addicts, patients at stage I of chronic bronchitis, asthmatic patients outside the attacks).
Plasma gastrin, somatostatin, pancreatic polypeptide and vasoactive intestinal peptide were measured by RIA in patients with hyperparathyroidism.
An understanding of this expanded peptide recognition will allow for the identification of novel physiologically relevant SH2B1/peptide interactions, which can contribute to the design of obesity and diabetes pharmaceuticals to target the ligand-binding interface of SH2B1 with high specificity.
A 200~240 kb SH2B1-containing deletion region on 16p11.2 is associated with early-onset obesity and developmental delay.
The objective of this study was to evaluate the influence of genetic variants related to obesity identified by genome-wide association studies (MC4R, TMEM18, KCTD15, SH2B1, SEC16B, BDNF, NEGR1, OLFM4 and HOXB5 genes) on anthropometric and dietary phenotypes in two Brazilian cohorts followed-up since birth.
In this study, we aimed to analyze pairwise interactions that are associated with Body Mass Index (BMI) between SNPs from twelve genes robustly associated with obesity (BDNF, ETV5, FAIM2, FTO, GNPDA2, KCTD15, MC4R, MTCH2, NEGR1, SEC16B, SH2B1, and TMEM18).
Due to the pleiotropic effects of related phenotypes, we tested six of these obesity-related genetic variants for their association with physical activity: fat mass and obesity-associated (FTO)(rs9939609)T&gt;A, potassium channel tetramerization domain containing (KCTD15) (rs11084753)G&gt;A, melanocortin receptor4 (MC4R)(rs17782313)T&gt;C, neuronal growth regulator 1 (NEGR1)(rs2815752)A&gt;G, SH2B adapter protein 1 (SH2B1)(rs7498665)A&gt;G, and transmembrane protein18 (TMEM18)(rs6548238)C&gt;T. European-American women (n = 263) and men (n = 229) (23.5 +/- 0.3 years, 24.6 +/- 0.2 kg/m2) were genotyped and completed the Paffenbarger physical activity Questionnaire.
Out of 107 CpG sites, 38 are located in gene promoters, including genes strongly implicated in obesity (MIR148A, BDNF, PTPMT1, NR1H3, MGAT1, SCGB3A1, HOXC12, PMAIP1, PSIP1, RPS10-NUDT3, RPS10, SKOR1, MAP2K5, SIX5, AGRN, IMMP1L, ELP4, ITIH4, SEMA3G, POMC, ADCY3, SSPN, LGR4, TUFM, MIR4721, SULT1A1, SULT1A2, APOBR, CLN3, SPNS1, SH2B1, ATXN2L, and IL27).
The phylogeny based on partial cytochrome b (cyt b) sequences suggests that this parasite is most closely related to Plasmodium tejerai (cyt b lineage pSPMAG01), a common malaria parasite of American birds.
Based on HRM analysis of vertebrate cytochrome b, 16S rRNA and COI PCR products, humans (72.36%) were the prominent blood-meal hosts of malaria vectors, but 20.91% of blood-meals were from non-human vertebrate hosts.
RelB(lo) DCs, generated in the presence of an nuclear factor-KB inhibitor, induce T-regulatory (Treg) cells and suppress inflammation in a model of rheumatoid arthritis.
In T1DM patients, late LPS-mediated nuclear DNA binding by RelA, p50, c-Rel, and RelB was impaired as compared with type 2 DM, rheumatoid arthritis, and healthy subjects, associated with impaired DC CD40 and MHC class I induction but normal cytokine production.
Thereafter, we found that KLF8 binds to the upstream sequence of AC132217.4, activating its expression at the transcriptional level, which accelerated OSCC metastasis via the AC132217.4-IGF2 axis both in vitro and in vivo.
We also revealed that the expression level of AC132217.4 was increased in OSCC tissues, and this elevation correlated with KLF8 and IGF2 expression.
Thus, our data demonstrate that the KLF8-AC132217.4-IGF2 signalling pathway plays a critical role in OSCC metastasis.
Kruppel-like factor 8 (KLF8) is highly expressed in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and contributes to tumor initiation and progression by promoting HCC cell proliferation and invasion.
Taken together, this work identified KLF8-induced FHL2 activation as a novel and critical signaling mechanism underlying human breast/colorectal cancer invasion and metastasis.
These results demonstrated for the first time that KLF8 modulates the formation and invasive ability of nasopharyngeal carcinoma.
However, the role of KLF8 in colorectal cancer remains unknown.
The aims of the present study were to examine KLF8 expression in colorectal cancers, to determine the role of KLF8 in cell differentiation and to investigate the antiproliferative effect of KLF8 silencing.
In addition, the biological impact of KLF8 knockdown on colorectal cancer cells was investigated in vitro and in vivo.
In this study, the clinicopathologic correlation of KLF8 expression with gastric adenocarcinoma in Taiwan was investigated.
The nuclear expression of KLF8 was significantly higher in the diffused type of gastric adenocarcinoma compared with the intestinal type (P = .036).
Positive nuclear KLF8 might be correlated with lower survival in gastric adenocarcinoma patients and might be an oncogene property in gastric adenocarcinoma carcinogenesis.
Whether a focal adhesion kinase (FAK)-Kruppel-like factor 8 (KLF8)-matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-9/E-cadherin signaling axis exists in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) remains unknown.
Here we report the mechanisms by which KLF8 crosstalks with Wnt/Beta-catenin signaling pathway and regulates hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells proliferation.
As impaired serotonergic and dopaminergic neurotransmission is implicated in the pathogenesis of depression and schizophrenia this study sought to investigate the putative association between several functional gene polymorphisms (SERT 5-HTTLPR, MAO-A VNTR, COMT Val158Met and DAT VNTR) and schizophrenia.
The purpose of the present study was to investigate the patterns of interregional correlations of serotonin transporter (SERT) availability with glucose metabolism using 7-Tesla magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and high-resolution positron emission tomography (PET) with 11C-3-amino-4-(2-dimethylaminomethylphenylthio)benzonitrile ([11C]DASB) and [18F]fluorodeoxyglucose ([18F]FDG) in antipsychotic-free patients with schizophrenia in order to shed new light on the disrupted functional connectivity in schizophrenia.
In SERT availability, the region of interest (ROI)-based analyses showed no significant group differences in any region, except for the anterior hippocampus where the SERT availability was lower in patients with schizophrenia than in controls.
Hirschsprung's disease was found in 47 (7.2%) patients with characteristic features of absence of ganglion cells, increased AChE activity in the lamina propria and muscularis mucosae, thick nerve fibers in the submucosa, and a lack of NADPH-d-positive fibers in muscularis mucosae.
The purpose of this study was to investigate the specificity and sensitivity of NADPH-diaphorase (NADPH-D) staining in suction rectal biopsies (SRB) to determine whether it can be used as a diagnostic test for Hirschsprung's disease (HD) and related disorders.
Methylenetetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase (MTHFD1) deficiency has recently been reported to cause a folate-responsive syndrome displaying a phenotype that includes megaloblastic anemia and severe combined immunodeficiency.
Exome sequencing demonstrated MTHFD1 deficiency as a novel cause of a combined immunodeficiency.
Whole exome sequencing of DNA from a patient with severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID), megaloblastic anemia and hemolytic uremic syndrome identified mutations in the MTHFD1 gene, which encodes a trifunctional enzyme involved in interconversion of folate coenzyme derivatives.
Human mutations in MTHFD1 have recently been identified in patients with severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID).
To date, only one patient with MTHFD1 deficiency, presenting with hyperhomocysteinemia, megaloblastic anaemia, hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS) and severe combined immunodeficiency, has been identified (Watkins et al J Med Genet 48:590-2, 2011).
In the present study, we investigated whether PTER affects TRAIL-induced apoptosis and its mechanism in TRAIL-resistant triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) cells.
Here we investigated the potential of PTER-isothiocyanate (ITC) conjugate, a novel class of hybrid compound (PTER-ITC) synthesized by appending an ITC moiety to the PTER backbone, to induce apoptotic cell death in hormone-dependent (MCF-7) and -independent (MDA-MB-231) breast cancer cell lines and to elucidate PPARGamma involvement in PTER-ITC action.
Our results showed that when pre-treated with PPARGamma antagonists or PPARGamma siRNA, both breast cancer cell lines suppressed PTER-ITC-induced apoptosis, as determined by annexin V/propidium iodide staining and cleaved caspase-9 expression.
Furthermore, PTER-ITC significantly increased PPARGamma mRNA and protein levels in a dose-dependent manner and modulated expression of PPARGamma-related genes in both breast cancer cell lines.
Collectively, our observations suggest potential applications for PTER-ITC in breast cancer prevention and treatment through modulation of the PPARGamma activation pathway.
In present study, it was found that MT1M was downregulated in more than 77.1% (91/118) of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) tissues compared with adjacent non-tumor tissues.
In the fully-adjusted model, higher IGFBP3 was associated with increased incidence of colorectal cancer (SHR = 1.20, 95% CI 1.01-1.43; P = .041 for every 1 standard deviation increase in IGFBP3) but not other cancers.
Higher IGFBP3 predicted increased incidence of colorectal cancer in older men independent of conventional risk factors and total IGF1.
Circulating insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) may be directly associated with colorectal cancer risk, and IGF binding protein 3 (IGFBP-3) is one of the most abundantly expressed binding proteins in various cancers.
Lyme Borrelia utilize a combination of Ixodes-produced inhibitors and native proteins [i.e., factor H-binding proteins (FHBPs)/complement regulator-acquiring surface proteins, p43, BBK32, BGA66, BGA71, CD59-like protein] to inhibit complement, while some relapsing fever spirochetes use C4b-binding protein and likely Ornithodoros-produced inhibitors.
A highly homologous receptor for C4bp was also found in the African tick-borne relapsing fever spirochete B. duttonii.
More importantly, the relapsing fever spirochetes specifically bind host C4b-binding protein, a major regulator of the antibody-mediated classical complement pathway.
The affected child was found to have inherited 3 deleterious mutations in two nephronophthisis genes, NPHP3 and NPHP4.
The present study was designed to explore mutations of NPHP2 and NPHP3 and clinical features in 18 Chinese infantile nephronophthisis (NPHP) patients.
Liver involvement was observed in all patients with NPHP3 mutations and congenital heart disease in two patients harbouring NPHP3 mutation of c.2369 T &gt; C (p.L790P).
Mutational analysis of the two who survived beyond post-delivery demonstrated compound heterozygous novel frameshift mutations in the nephronophthisis type 3 gene (NPHP3).
Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) with predominant cerebellar ataxia (PSP-C) is a rare phenotype of PSP.
Patients who develop progressive supranuclear palsy with predominant cerebellar ataxia (PSP-C) develop cerebellar ataxia as the initial and principal symptom, may be misdiagnosed as having multiple system atrophy with predominant cerebellar features (MSA-C).
A 14 kDa protein detected in pre-treatment saliva from the OSCC patients was identified as a truncated cystatin SA-I, with deletion of three amino acids from the N-terminus.
The authors propose that ProteinChip analysis may provide a reliable screening test for early diagnosis of OSCC and that truncated cystatin SA-I might be a useful tumor biomarker for OSCC.
We examined the TRAIL-mediated cytotoxicity rates of clonally-related primary and metastatic oral cancer (OC) cells and correlated them with the expression levels of TRAIL receptors, cathepsin B and cystatins A, B, C and M. Two pairs of primary (686Tu and 101A) and metastatic (686Ln and 101B) OC cell lines were treated with various concentrations (5 to 1000 ng/ml) of recombinant human TRAIL protein for 14 h, and cell viability and apoptotic rate were determined.
We have now studied the expression of both cystatins A and B in benign prostatic hyperplasias (BPH), prostatic intraepithelial neoplasias (PIN) and carcinomas of the prostatic epithelium and compared it with the expression of high molecular weight (HMW) cytokeratin as well as the proliferation markers cyclin A and Ki-67.
Binary logistic regression to generate a propensity score and receiver operating characteristic curves were developed for each of the noninvasive markers for predicting CKD, and the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve was greatest for FIB-4 score (0.750), followed by NFS (0.710), AAR (0.594), APRI (0.587), and BARD score (0.561).
A cut-off value of 1.100 for FIB-4 score gave a sensitivity of 68.85% and a specificity of 71.07% for predicting CKD.
In multiple logistic regression analysis, only FIB-4 score &gt;=1.100 (OR 2.660, 95% CI 1.201-5.889; p = .016), older age, higher diastolic blood pressure and higher uric acid were independent predictors of CKD.
High noninvasive fibrosis score is associated with an increased risk of prevalent CKD; the FIB-4 is the better predictor.
With a cut-off value of 1.100 for FIB-4, it is useful in excluding the presence of CKD in patients with NAFLD.
Cox regression models were used to determine the association of FIB4 with the risk of major LRE (gastrointestinal bleeding, ascites, hepatic encephalopathy, hepato-renal syndrome or hepatocellular carcinoma) or LRD.
Interleukin-6, hyaluronic acid, and the FIB-4 hepatic fibrosis index were higher among participants who developed progressive CKD, but were no longer associated with progressive CKD after adjustment.
The objectives of this study were to develop a reliable method to detect SQSTM1/P392L post-zygotic mutations, by optimizing a polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-clamping method reported to be effective in detecting post-zygotic mutations in peripheral blood from patients with fibrous dysplasia; and to evaluate the frequency of this post-zygotic mutation in PDB patients.
The FC features of 20 D/THL (11 BCL2(+)/MYC(+), 5 BCL6(+)/MYC(+), 4 BCL2(+)/BCL6(+)/MYC(+)) were evaluated, compared to 20 B-lymphoblastic leukemias (B-LBL), and correlated with overall survival.
We conclude that expression of TdT in a B-cell lymphoma with mature features or expression of surface light chain in a case otherwise suggestive of B-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma should prompt an expedited evaluation for DHL/THL.
The genotoxicity and cytotoxicity of a Chinese medicinal herb, Tripterygium hypoglaucum (level) Hutch (THH), was investigated in human promyelocytic leukemia (HL-60) cells using the hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase mutation assay.
As CCR7 is expressed on activated dendritic cells (DCs), and these cells require CCR7 to migrate to the draining lymph node, we expected decreased migration of DCs into the lymph node in the absence of CCR7 during cutaneous leishmaniasis.
The IOPs were compared between wild-type and LPLA2-deficient mice during their aging, after topical administration of antiglaucoma medications such as travoprost, dorzolamide, or timolol maleate, or after induction of endotoxin-induced uveitis (EIU) using lipopolysaccharide (LPS).
The present study was conducted to elucidate the pathophysiological roles of the lysosomal phospholipase A2 (LPLA2), a phospholipid-degrading enzyme, and the production of oxidized phospholipids (oxPLs) in autoimmune uveitis using a rat model.
This study was conducted to elucidate pathophysiological roles of the lysosomal phospholipase A2 (LPLA2), a phospholipid-degrading enzyme, of the aqueous humor (AH) in uveitis using an animal model and clinical specimens.
Sixty-five human AH specimens, in which 11 eyes had a history of chronic uveitis, were collected during patient cataract surgeries and used to determine LPLA2 activity.
In the clinical specimens, the AH obtained from the patients with a history of uveitis possessed significantly higher LPLA2 activity than that from the senile patients with cataract but without other ocular diseases.
Analysis of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid collected from human patients with P. aeruginosa pneumonia demonstrated cytotoxic activity, and lavage fluid contained amyloid molecules, including oligomeric Tau and ABeta.
Meta-regression demonstrated a positive correlation between the degree of CPAP and the incidence of pneumonia with a regression coefficient of +0.61 (95 % CI 0.02-1.21, P = 0.048, Tau (2) = 0.078, r (2) = 7.87 %).
We conclude that the use of etanercept along with antituberculosis treatment appears to be safe and effective in patients with pulmonary tuberculosis presenting with acute respiratory failure.
PubMed, EMBASE, CINAHL, SCOPUS, and the Cochrane Library were searched from inception until January 2013 using the following keywords in various combinations: ARDS, treatment, nitric oxide, heliox, steroids, surfactant, etanercept, prostaglandin therapy, inhaled beta adrenergic receptor agonists, N-acetylcysteine, ipratroprium bromide, dornase, plasminogen activators, fibrinolytics or other anticoagulants, and children.
The patient then rapidly developed irreversible type II respiratory failure despite the administration of etanercept and an anti-cytomegalovirus agent and died on the eighth re-MV day.
-tumor necrosis factor (TNF); acute lung injury (ALI); acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS); positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP);epithelial sodium channel (ENaC);neural precursor cell-expressed developmentally downregulated (gene 4) protein (Nedd4-2);serum and glucocorticoid dependent kinase (Sgk-1);insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1);Protein Kinase C (PKC);reactive oxygen species (ROS);myosin light chain (MLC);pneumolysin (PLY);listeriolysin (LLO);interleukin (IL);bronchoalveolar lavage fluids (BALF);Bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG);TNF receptor type 1 (TNFR1); TNF receptor type 2 (TNF-R2);
The aim of the present study was to replicate the previously reported association of KLF12 gene polymorphisms with rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
Furthermore, the integration of our data with those from previous genome-wide association studies showed that KLF12 and PTPRT are the unique loci that are commonly associated in 3 different studies (P = 0.004 and P = 0.002 for KLF12 in the Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium study and the Brigham and Women's Rheumatoid Arthritis Sequential Study genome-wide association study, respectively).
Whole exome sequencing of DNA from a patient with severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID), megaloblastic anemia and hemolytic uremic syndrome identified mutations in the MTHFD1 gene, which encodes a trifunctional enzyme involved in interconversion of folate coenzyme derivatives.
To date, only one patient with MTHFD1 deficiency, presenting with hyperhomocysteinemia, megaloblastic anaemia, hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS) and severe combined immunodeficiency, has been identified (Watkins et al J Med Genet 48:590-2, 2011).
Serum METRNL levels were significantly lower in subjects with diabetes mellitus compared with those without diabetes.
Metrnl and OSM levels were assessed at baseline, 6, and 12 months after laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy (LSG) in 25 patients with obesity, as well as in 33 normal-weight controls.
At baseline, patients with obesity showed lower Metrnl and higher OSM levels compared to controls.
Our data indicate that LSG conversely modulated Metrnl and OSM levels, and suggest that a dual approach modulating these two molecules might provide a novel strategy for obesity and type 2 diabetes treatment.International Journal of Obesity accepted article preview online, 30 October 2017. doi:10.1038/ijo.2017.268.
We systematically evaluated the role of METRNL for human adipogenesis and its association with obesity, browning and hyperinsulinemia in children.
These interactions with adipose tissue dynamics may contribute to the clinically observed body mass index-independent association of METRNL expression with hyperinsulinemia and adipose tissue inflammation in human samples.
This may also explain our observations of increased METRNL expression in adipocytes but not SVF cells in obese children compared with lean children and the subsequent hyperinsulinemia.
Subfatin is a novel adipokine regulated by adipogenesis and obesity, with tissue distribution different from its homologue Meteorin.
We found that through the interaction between NoxO1 and growth receptor-bound protein 2 (Grb2), the Casitas B-lineage lymphoma (Cbl) E3 ligase was recruited, leading to decreased NoxO1 stability and a subsequent reduction in ROS generation upon epidermal growth factor (EGF) stimulation.
CRISPR/Cas9-mediated NoxO1 knockout in human colon cancer cells abrogated anchorage-independent growth on soft agar and tumor-forming ability in athymic nude mice.
Moreover, the expression and stability of NoxO1 were significantly increased in human colon cancer tissues compared with normal colon.
Moreover, the microarray analysis and colony formation assay indicated that NADPH oxidase organizer 1 (Noxo1) and Gna14 are induced in tumor epithelial cells in a TNF-Alfa-dependent manner, and have an important role in tumorigenicity and tumor-initiating cell property of gastric cancer cells.
To investigate whether NOX and NOX accessory gene expression might be a factor common to specific human tumour types, this study measured the expression levels of NOX genes 1-5, dual oxidase 1 and 2, as well as those of NOX accessory genes NoxO1, NoxA1, p47(phox), p67(phox) and p22(phox) in human cancer cell lines and in tumour and adjacent normal tissue pairs by quantitative, real-time RT-PCR.
PCR of human stomach cDNA libraries showed that Nox1 and Nox organizer 1 (NOXO1) messages were absent from normal stomachs, while they were specifically coexpressed in intestinal- and diffuse-type adenocarcinomas including signet-ring cell carcinoma.
Immunohistochemistry showed that Nox1 and NOXO1 proteins were absent from chronic atrophic gastritis (15 cases), adenomas (4 cases), or surrounding tissues of adenocarcinomas (45 cases).
Confocal microscopy revealed that Nox1, NOXO1, Nox activator 1, and p22(phox) were predominantly associated with Golgi apparatus in these cancer cells, while diffuse-type adenocarcinomas also contained cancer cells having Nox1 and its partner proteins in their nuclei.
Interestingly, the IL1RL1, HLA, IL13 and C11orf30 regions are overlapping susceptibility loci among atopic dermatitis and asthma or allergic rhinitis.
Of these, only rs3771180 in IL1RL1 was associated with any other allergic disease (for hay fever, OR 0.64, 95% CI 0.53-0.77, P = 2.5*10(-6) ).
Serum levels of IL-16, IL-33 and the decoy receptor of IL-33, soluble ST2, are elevated in allergic rhinitis.
Recent studies show that IL-16, soluble ST2 or anti-IL-33 reduce type 2 cytokines (such as IL-5) and eosinophilia in murine models of allergic asthma or allergic rhinitis respectively.
In this study, we studied the release of IL-5, IL-16, IL-33 and soluble ST2 in allergic rhinitis patients after nasal allergen challenge and natural pollen exposure.
The observed upregulation of soluble ST2 and IL-16 after nasal allergen challenge and during peak pollination season suggests potential regulatory roles of these cytokines in the inflammatory reaction in allergic rhinitis.
Interestingly, the IL1RL1, HLA, IL13 and C11orf30 regions are overlapping susceptibility loci among atopic dermatitis and asthma or allergic rhinitis.
KM-HN-1 expression was observed in various cancer tissues and cancer cell lines at both mRNA and protein levels.
Immunofluorescence staining of an esophageal cancer cell line revealed that KM-HN-1 protein was present exclusively in the nucleus during mitosis.
Higher levels of IgG antibodies specific to KM-HN-1 were detected in many types and numbers of cancer patients but not in healthy donors.
The CTL lines specific to KM-HN-1, generated from HLA-A*2402-positive healthy donors and cancer patients, killed human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-A24-positive cancer cells expressing KM-HN-1 but not cell lines that did not express either KM-HN-1 or HLA-A24.
We identified a novel cancer/testis antigen, KM-HN-1, which elicited humoral immune responses in patients with various types of cancer.
Furthermore, KM-HN-1-specific CTLs could be generated from both healthy donors and cancer patients, which indicated that KM-HN-1 can be a candidate for an ideal target for cancer immunotherapy.
Intragenic deletions of the contactin-associated protein-like 2 gene (CNTNAP2) have been found in patients with Gilles de la Tourette syndrome, intellectual disability (ID), obsessive compulsive disorder, cortical dysplasia-focal epilepsy syndrome, autism, schizophrenia, Pitt-Hopkins syndrome, stuttering, and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
Based on genomic rearrangements and copy number variations, the contactin-associated protein-like 2 gene (CNTNAP2) has been implicated in neurodevelopmental disorders such as Gilles de la Tourette syndrome, intellectual disability, obsessive compulsive disorder, cortical dysplasia-focal epilepsy syndrome, autism, schizophrenia, Pitt-Hopkins syndrome, and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
Recently, a homozygous truncating variant in CPLX1 was suggested to be causative for migrating epilepsy and structural brain abnormalities.
However, the currently limited knowledge on CPLX1 suggests that loss of complexin 1 function may lead to a complex but variable clinical phenotype, and our findings encourage further investigations of CPLX1 in patients with ID, developmental delay and myoclonic epilepsy to unravel the phenotypic spectrum of carriers of CPLX1 variants.
Downregulation of complexin 1 (CPLX1) mRNA was correlated with genotype, but the expression of other Parkinson's disease genes was not.
Therefore, AF and APH can be used as potential therapeutic agents against type 2 diabetes and associated metabolic disorders, including obesity, by enhancing glucose and lipid metabolism.
All our data suggest that APH can be used as potential therapeutic agents against type 2 diabetes and related metabolic disorders, including obesity, by enhancing glucose and lipid metabolism.
Multivariable logistic regression analysis adjusted for ethnicity, body mass index, maternal age, parity, smoking status, social deprivation, hypertensive disease, antepartum haemorrhage (APH), diabetes and relevant pre-existing medical conditions.
Distribution of gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM), antepartum hemorrhage (APH), maternal anemia, premature rupture of membrane (PROM), maternal occupation, parity, sheesha smoking, and parental consanguinity were significantly different (P &lt; 0.05) between mothers of LBW and normal birth weight NBW (&gt;=2500 g) babies.
Therefore, we suggest that APH-4 and APH-11 are novel dual PPARAlfa/Gamma agonists and are potentially useful for treating type 2 diabetes by enhancing glucose and lipid metabolism.
In comparison with the previously published experience with unilateral high-grade thalamic astrocytomas where H3F3A p.K27 was present in two-thirds of cases, the absence of this molecular subgroup in bithalamic gliomas was striking.
Compared with healthy controls, schizophrenia patients presented disruptions in diurnal rhythms of the expression of PER1, PER3, and NPAS2 and the release of orexin, accompanied by a delayed phase in the expression of PER2, decreases in PER3 and NPAS2 expression, and an increase in cortisol levels at baseline.
Compared with conventional medicine alone, Ginkgo biboba in combination with conventional medicine was superior in improving Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) scores at 24 weeks for patients with Alzheimer's disease (MD 2.39, 95% CI 1.28 to 3.50, P&lt;0.0001) and mild cognitive impairment (MD 1.90, 95% CI 1.41 to 2.39, P&lt;0.00001), and Activity of Daily Living (ADL) scores at 24 weeks for Alzheimer's disease (MD -3.72, 95% CI -5.68 to -1.76, P=0.0002).
Patients with multiple sclerosis (MS) (median 46.2 pg/ml, n=95), amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) (160.1 pg/ml, n=50), mild cognitive impairment/Alzheimer's disease (MCI/AD) (65.6 pg/ml, n=20), Guillain-Barre syndrome (GBS) (91.0 pg/ml, n=20) or subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) (345.0 pg/ml, n=20) had higher CSF NfH(SMI35) values than the reference cohort (27.1 pg/ml, n=73, p&lt;0.0001 for each comparison).
The present study delineates four more patterns and their families: the achondroplasia pattern, spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia congenita pattern, the Larsen/OPD pattern and the Stickler/Kniest pattern.
Glis2/NPHP7 is a transcriptional regulator mutated in type 7 nephronophthisis, an autosomal recessive ciliopathy associated with cystic and fibrotic kidney disease as well as characteristic extrarenal manifestations.
Although BBS11/TRIM32 represents a RING finger E3 ubiquitin ligase also involved in hereditary forms of muscular dystrophy, NPHP7/Glis2 is a Gli-like transcriptional repressor that localizes to the nucleus, deviating from the ciliary localization of most other ciliopathy-associated gene products.
The knockdown of zebrafish bbs1 and nphp7.2 caused similar phenotypic changes including convergent extension defects, curvature of the body axis, hydrocephalus, abnormal heart looping and cystic pronephros, all consistent with an altered ciliary function.
In addition, we present the first case of Caroli disease due to mutations in WDR19/NPHP13 and the second case ever with a recessive mutation in GLIS2/NPHP7.
Asymptomatic subjects aged 6 to 12 years with myopia of 0.50 to 5.00 D and astigmatism of 1.25 to 3.50 D of axes 180 +/- 20 were fitted with Menicon Z Night Toric Lens (NKL Contactlenzen B.V., Emmen, The Netherlands).
In humans, a mutation in the Glis2 gene has been linked to the development of nephronophthisis (NPHP), a recessive cystic kidney disease, while mutations in Glis3 lead to an extended multisystem phenotype that includes the development of neonatal diabetes, polycystic kidneys, congenital hypothyroidism, and facial dysmorphism.
Mutations in GLIS2 are linked to nephronophthisis, a chronic kidney disease characterized by renal fibrosis and atrophy in children and young adults.
Two genes linked to schizophrenia, DTNBP1 and MUTED, encode proteins that belong to the endosome-localized Biogenesis of Lysosome-related Organelles Complex-1 (BLOC-1).
Disrupted in schizophrenia 1 (DISC1) controls the microtubule network that is used by viruses as a route to the nucleus, while DTNBP1, MUTED, and BLOC1S3 regulate endosomal to lysosomal routing that is also important in viral traffic.
The schizophrenia susceptibility gene dystrobrevin-binding protein 1 (DTNBP1) encodes dysbindin, which along with its binding partner Muted is an essential component of the biogenesis of lysosome-related organelles complex 1 (BLOC-1).
The IR1 patients are characterized by higher prevalence of obesity, pathological waist, MetS, dyslipidemia and IGT/DM2.
Pretreatment with SB203580, a p38 MAPK inhibitor, dramatically abrogated the upregulating effects of DG-1g on p-p38 MAPK/p38 MAPK, p-CREB/CREB, and p-Bad/Bad ratios and HIF-1[Formula: see text], VEGF-A, and vWF expression and the downregulating effects of DG-1g on GFAP, cytochrome c, cleaved caspase-3, and cerebral infarction.
SB203580, a specific inhibitor of p38 MAPK, administered 30 min prior to ischemia abrogated the downregulating effects of I-FA on cerebral infarction, and mitochondrial Bax and cleaved caspase-3 expression, and the upregulating effects of I-FA on the p-p38 MAPK/p38 MAPK ratio, p-p90RSK expression, p-Bad expression, and the p-CREB/CREB, and cytosolic and mitochondrial Bcl-2/Bax ratios.
Studies on small populations assessed the relevance of an oxytocin treatment in several endocrine and nutritional pathologies like post-surgery craniopharyngioma, panhypopituitarism and obesity.
Oxytocin is structurally related to vasopressin and is synthesised in the same hypothalamic nuclei, thus we hypothesised that patients with acquired central diabetes insipidus and anterior hypopituitarism would display an oxytocin deficiency.
Fifty-six participants (age 46.54 +/- 16.30 yrs; central diabetes insipidus: n = 20, 8 males; clinical control: n = 15, 6 males; healthy control: n = 20, 7 males) provided two saliva samples which were analysed for oxytocin and completed two empathy tasks.
Hypopituitary patients (both central diabetes insipidus and clinical control groups) had significantly lower oxytocin concentrations compared to healthy control participants.
Regression analyses further revealed that central diabetes insipidus patients' oxytocin concentrations significantly predicted their performance on easy items of the reading the mind in the eyes task.
Hypopituitarism may therefore be associated with reduced oxytocin concentrations and impaired empathic ability.
While further studies are needed to replicate these findings, our data suggest that oxytocin replacement may offer a therapeutic approach to improve psychological well-being in patients with hypopituitarism.
Oxytocin was measured in saliva of craniopharyngioma patients and controls before and after standardized breakfast and associations with gender, body mass index, hypothalamic involvement, diabetes insipidus, and irradiation were analyzed.
In light of these findings, the authors believe that further research into the potential benefits of intranasal oxytocin therapy for patients with panhypopituitarism is necessary to determine whether a broader population may also benefit from intranasal oxytocin therapy.
We report four cases of panhypopituitarism who had spontaneous onset of labor, undermining the role of maternal oxytocin in the first phase of labor.
This study investigated the expression level and prognostic significance of CD39 in human rectal adenocarcinoma.
In addition to primary tumors, CD39 was also abundantly expressed in liver metastases and tumor-draining lymph nodes from metastatic rectal adenocarcinoma.
Taken together, the current study revealed that malignant epithelial cells of human rectal adenocarcinoma strongly express CD39 that may play a potential role in the tumor invasion and metastasis.
The aim of this research was to prepare 99mTc-EDDA/HYNIC-Lys(Nal)-Urea-Glu (99mTc-EDDA/HYNIC-iPSMA) obtained from lyophilized kit formulations and evaluate the in vitro and in vivo radiopharmaceutical binding to prostate cancer cells over-expressing PSMA, as well as the 99mTc-EDDA/HYNIC-iPSMA normal biodistribution in humans and the preliminary uptake in patients with prostate cancer.
Hepatocarcinoma (HepG2), lymphoma (Jurkat) and osteosarcoma (HOS) cells, incubated with 6.25, 12.5, 25, 50, 75 and 100% of Aba Eku (AEL), Olusosun (OSL), Awotan (AWL) and Nagpur (NPL) simulated leachates for 24 h, were assessed for cell viability using MTT assay and morphological alterations.
Thirteen months later, he was hospitalized for lethargy and hyponatremia of 108 mEq/L, with an antidiuretic hormone level of 2.5 pg/mL, which suggested syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion (SIADH).
Mutations of either AVPR2 or AQP2 result in a genetic disease known as nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, which is characterized by the lack of responsiveness of the collecting duct to the antidiuretic action of AVP.
Here we provide an updated overview of the genetic defects causing NDI, the most recent strategies under investigation for rescuing the activity of mutated AVPR2 or AQP2, or for bypassing defective AVPR2 signaling and restoring AQP2 plasma membrane expression.
Such disorders underlie syndromes of inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone (SIADH) and edematous diseases, such as congestive heart failure and decompensated liver cirrhosis.
AVP-induced water retention could produce hyponatremia, and further accelerate poor long-term outcome of edematous diseases.
Central diabetes insipidus (DI) is a rare disease characterized by the excretion of excessive volumes of dilute urine due to reduced levels of the antidiuretic hormone arginine vasopressin (AVP), caused by an acquired or genetic defect in the neurohypophysis.
The finding of novel autoantigens, GAPDH and ADH strengthen the hypothesis that DH is an autoimmune disease of the liver.
To observe the influence of electroacupuncture (EA) stimulation with different electrical current intensities and therapeutic intervals on learning-memory ability and expression of Beta-amyloid peptide ABeta 1-40 and arginine vasopressin (AVP) genes in the hippocampal CA 1 region in vascular dementia (VD) rats, so as to provide evidence for treatment of VD.
The present study investigated TAGLN2 expression patterns in HBV related hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) tissues and its role in HBV transcription and replication.
Using Skyline software package, we demonstrated a statistically significant higher abundance of the C1R, LCN2, SLPI, FAM49B, TAGLN2, CFB, C3, C4B, LRG1, SERPINA1 candidate biomarkers in the saliva of OSCC patients.
To investigate the relationship between the expression of transgelin-2 and the clinicopathological factors of colorectal carcinoma and evaluate the value of transgelin-2 in prognostic assessment of the colorectal cancer patients.
Using tissue microarray and immunohistochemical methods, we examined transgelin-2 of 120 colorectal cancer patients received surgical treatment from September 2002 to April 2004, including 74 male and 46 female, age from 26 to 89 years.
Analyzed the relationship between transgelin-2 and both the clinicopathological features and prognosis of the colorectal cancer by using X^2 test and Kaplan-Meier survival analysis.
Distant metastasis (RR = 8.318, 95%CI: 4.119 - 16.790), lymph nodes metastasis (RR = 2.794, 95%CI: 1.246 - 6.263) and transgelin-2 expression (RR = 1.834, 95%CI: 1.118- 2.973) were independent prognostic factors in patients with colorectal cancer (P &lt; 0.05).
The expression of transgelin-2 is correlated with clinicopathological features and prognosis in colorectal cancer, may be the potential marker of metastasis and the prognosis of colorectal cancer patients.
In conclusion, epigenetic repression of the miR-1-133a cluster may play a critical             role in colorectal cancer metastasis by silencing TAGLN2.
Furthermore, among 22 m/z species that are differentially expressed in Barrett's adenocarcinoma cases with and without regional lymph node metastasis, one was identified as TAGLN2.
In the validation set, we found a correlation of the expression levels of COX7A2 and TAGLN2 with a poor prognosis while S100-A10 was confirmed by multivariate analysis as a novel independent prognostic factor in Barrett's adenocarcinoma.
The clinical situations associated with increased bleeding risk (old symptoms) in patients with type 3 vWD compared to obligatory carriers were epistaxis [odds ratio (OR) = 175.5; 95% confidence interval (CI) 14.55-2116.69; P &lt; 0.001], cutaneous symptoms (OR = 108; 95% CI 10.16-1147.39; P &lt; 0.001) and hemarthrosis (OR = 19.5%; 95% CI 4.32-156.46; P &lt; 0.001).
Up to 40% of patients with type 3 VWD experience joint bleeding, which can lead to haemophilic arthropathy.
The rationale for long-term prophylaxis in vWD is obvious: prophylaxis has been successfully used in hemophilia, and joint hemorrhages with development of hemophilic arthropathy can occur, especially in type 3 vWD.
The arthropathy results from recurrent bleeding into a joint, with the ankle and hip being the joints most often affected, particularly in patients with type 3 vWD.
Here, we conducted a microarray analysis and found that miR-374c-5p was most down-regulated miRNA in TGFBeta1-treated cervical cancer cells compared to the expression in parental cell lines.
Ectopic overexpression of miR-374c-5p inhibited cervical cancerl invasion and migration in TGFBeta1- treated cervical cancer cells.
In clinical cervical cancer samples, lower miR-374c-5p expression predicted poor patient survival and highe lymph node metastasis in cervical cancers.
miR-374c-5p was negatively correlated with FOXC1, which was upregulated in cervical cancers with lymph node metastasis.
Taken together, our findings highlight the important role of miR-374c-5p in regulating cervical cancers metastasis by targeting FOXC1, suggesting that miR-374c-5p may represent a novel potential therapeutic target and prognostic marker in cervical cancers.
Our studies of a mouse model reveal that phospholipase CGamma1 (PLCGamma1) is the dominant signaling effector by which excessive activation of TrkB promotes epilepsy.
These findings advance PLCGamma1 as a novel target for therapies aimed at preventing temporal lobe epilepsy induced by status epilepticus.
Significantly, abnormal expression and activation of PLC-Gamma1 appears in various brain disorders such as epilepsy, depression, Huntington's disease and Alzheimer's disease.
Here, we aimed to assess whether murine Gpx4, a crucial antioxidant enzyme that protects neurons from membrane damage and ferroptosis, is critical for the protection from neuronal inflammation in two distinct pathophysiologic diseases, namely metabolic dysfunction in diet-induced obesity or PD.
In this work, we studied the prognostic value of the expression of 9 proteins, Ki-67, p53, Bcl-2, PSA, HER2, E-cadherin, p21WAF1/Cip1, p27Kip1 and p16ink4a in prostate cancer.
The p53, Bcl-2, Ki-67 and p27Kip1 proteins may be useful additional prognostic markers for prostate cancer.
The biological significance of miR-24 expression in prostate cancer cells was assessed by a series of in vitro bioassays and the effect on proposed targets p27 (CDKN1B) and p16 (CDK2NA) was investigated.
Additional mechanistic studies of two biomarkers, phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) and cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1B (p27Kip1), in prostate cancer revealed that TFC treatment significantly upregulated the expression of PTEN and p27Kip1.
Dual labeling fluorescence in situ hybridization using probes for 12p13 (CDKN1B; p27) and centromere 12 as a reference was used to successfully analyze more than 3700 prostate cancers with clinical follow-up data assembled in a tissue microarray format.
In the present work hypomethylation of the DDX43 gene was detected in 15% (32/214) of primary acute myeloid leukemia (AML) using real-time quantitative methylation-specific PCR (RQ-MSP).
In the present study, we investigated the methylation status of the DDX43 promoter in 87 Chinese patients with chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) using real-time quantitative methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction and examined the DDX43 transcript in 35 patients using real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction.
The aim of this study was to investigate the expression status of the helicase antigen (HAGE) transcript and its clinical significance in patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and chronic myeloid leukemia (CML).
HAGE cDNA expression was more frequently present among the patients with acute monoblastic leukemia (M(4) and M(5), 7 of 20, 35.0%), compared to the patients with acute non-monoblastic leukemia (M(1), M(2), M(3) and M(6), 4 of 54, 7.4%) (p = 0.007).
Here, we report the expression patterns of ADAM8, ADAM9, ADAM10, ADAM12, ADAM17 and ADAM19 in cultured human myoblasts and peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) in vitro, as well as in biopsies from patients suffering from polymyositis (PM), dermatomyositis (DM), inclusion body myositis (IBM) and non-inflammatory controls.
However, the neurotoxicity and mechanisms of TDBP-TAZTO have not yet been studied.
We hypothesize that TDBP-TAZTO could induce neurotoxicity in mouse hippocampal neurons and SH-SY5Y cells.
Our findings suggested that cell apoptosis and oxidative stress are important mechanisms in neurotoxicity induced by TDBP-TAZTO.
However, the neurotoxicity of TDBP-TAZTO has not yet studied in rodents.
We hypothesize that TDBP-TAZTO could induce the neurotoxicity in rat hippocampal neurons.
Our findings suggested that TDBP-TAZTO induces significant hippocampal neurotoxicity, which provokes cognitive impairment and depression-like behaviors in adult rats.
In addition, the top candidate lncRNA ENSG00000261777 shares an intron with DDX19, and interacts with IGF2 P1, indicating its involvement in prostate cancer.
The International Contact Dermatitis Research Group (ICDRG) in 1976 examined the incidence of sensitization to TDB P and found two positives among 1103 patients.
We have previously shown that sera of AD and Down's syndrome patients contain Abs which bind specifically to the high molecular weight neurofilament protein (NF-H) of the purely cholinergic electromotor neurons of Torpedo.
The analysis of sex ratios in different variants of trisomy 13 with respect to ascertainment (prenatal diagnosis, miscarriages, liveborn) also does not support an intrauterine selection against males as a cause of a female prevalence among carriers of homologous REA.
We have used 20 PCR-based DNA polymorphisms to determine whether trisomy 13 due to de novo rea(13q;13q) in six cases is caused by translocation (13q;13q) or isochromosome (13q;13q); to determine the parental origin of the rearrangements and the mechanisms of formation.
Nominal significance was shown for 12 SNPs from BDNF, DRD1, HTR1E, HTR2A, HTR3B, DAT1/SLC6A3, and TPH2 genes replicating reported associations with ADHD.
For overt aggressive impulsivity nominal significance was shown for 6 SNPs from BDNF, DRD4, HTR1E, PNMT, and TPH2 genes that have also been reported to be associated with ADHD.
Next-generation sequencing (NGS) was performed to capture and sequence all exons of 47 known retinal dystrophy-associated genes in two affected family members who had no mutations in CYP4V2.
To describe a 42-year-old man, a known case of Bietti crystalline dystrophy who underwent surgery for unilateral full thickness macular hole.
Macular hole can occur in Bietti crystalline dystrophy and the post-surgical outcome is good.
We compare the choroidal vascular area between Bietti crystalline dystrophy (BCD) patients with CYP4V2 mutations, retinitis pigmentosa (RP) patients with EYS mutations, and normal controls, and investigate the correlation between choroidal vascular area and associated parameters.
B-scan layer-by-layer analysis and unique SD-OCT reflectivity patterns of the following retinal white lesions are reviewed in the order of their retinal layer localization: myelinated nerve fiber layer, cotton wool spot, exudates, edema residues, drusen, fundus albipunctatus, Stargardt disease, Bietti crystalline dystrophy, punctate inner choroidopathy (PIC), presumed ocular histoplasmosis syndrome (POHS), post-photocoagulation chorioretinal scarring, and osseous choristoma.
Eleven deleterious variants, six nonsense and five missense, were identified in seven genes: four LCA-associated genes (CEP290, IQCB1, NMNAT1, and RPGRIP1), one gene responsible for syndromic LCA (ALMS1), and two IRDs-related genes (CTNNA1 and CYP4V2).
The results of this study demonstrate that causative variants identified in the CTNNA1 and CYP4V2 genes are also associated with LCA.
The identification of mutations in the CTNNA1 and CYP4V2 genes requires further elucidation in larger cohorts with LCA.
Association of CNV has been reported in patients with fundus flavimaculatus, best dystrophy, gyrate atrophy, choroideremia, retinitis pigmentosa, adult-onset foveomacular vitelliform dystrophy, Sorsby macular dystrophy, Bietti crystalline dystrophy, and myotonic dystrophy-related macular dystrophy.
To compare atrophy of the choroid and retina between Bietti crystalline dystrophy (BCD) patients and EYS-related retinitis pigmentosa (RP) patients with a similar degree of central visual field defects, age, and axial length (AL).
Bietti crystalline corneoretinal dystrophy (BCD) is an inherited eye disease that is most common in the Chinese.
In this study, 43 Chinese BCD families were recruited; most patients manifested the characteristic phenotype of BCD, with 2 families initially misdiagnosed with retinitis pigmentosa.
We hypothesize that HP-B-CD ameliorates liver cholesterol and intracellular cholesterol levels inside Kupffer cells (KCs).
In contrast to control injections, hyperlipidemic mice treated with HP-B-CD demonstrated a shift in intracellular cholesterol distribution towards cytoplasmic cholesteryl ester (CE) storage and a decrease in cholesterol crystallization inside KCs.
Secreted frizzled-related protein 2 (Sfrp2) is highly expressed in developing limbs and is associated with skeletal malformation such as Brachydactyly and Syndactyly.
Here, we show that inactivation of Sfrp2 results in subtle limb defects in mice with mesomelic shortening and consistent shortening of all autopodal elements that is clinically manifested as brachydactyly.
Serum DHCR24 Abs from 395 HCV-positive patients, including 133 chronic hepatitis (CHC), 85 liver cirrhosis (LCC), and 177 HCC (HCC-C) patients; 232 hepatitis B virus (HBV)-positive patients, including 103 chronic hepatitis (CHB), 56 liver cirrhosis (LCB), and 73 HCC (HCC-B) patients; and 24 healthy controls, were measured using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.
DHCR24 auto-antibody represents a potential noninvasive biomarker for HCV-related liver disease and may facilitate the diagnosis of PIVKA-II and AFP-negative HCC.
Secondly, we explore the interplay between cholesterol precursors (7-dehydrocholesterol and desmosterol) and the enzymes that act upon them (DHCR7 and DHCR24) in the context of liver disease.
Here, we identify five significant miRNAs by a comprehensive analysis in esophageal cancer, and two of them (hsa-miR-100-5p and hsa-miR-133b) show better prognoses with significant difference for both 3-year and 5-year survival.
miR-100 has been reported to be significantly downregulated in a variety of cancers, including esophageal cancer.
However, the role of miR-100 in human esophageal cancer has not been fully elucidated.
We demonstrated that overexpression of miR-100 in esophageal cancer cells markedly inhibited cell proliferation, migration and invasion as well as tumor growth.
Our results indicated that miR-100 plays a tumor-suppressor role in esophageal cancer and suggest its potential application for esophageal cancer treatment.
Age (odds ratio (OR) 0.980; p &lt; 0.001), advanced clinical tumor stage (cT3 vs. cTa, cTis, cT1; OR 3.367; p &lt; 0.001), presence of hydronephrosis (OR 1.844; p = 0.043) and advanced tumor stage T3 and/or N+ at CT imaging (OR 4.378; p &lt; 0.001) were independent predictors for pT3/4 and/or pN+ tumor stage.
Tumor location (involvement of the vesical trigone), clinical T stage (&gt;= cT3) and the number of tumors (&gt;= 3), but not sex, tumor grade and histological features determined by transurethral resection of bladder tumor, tumor size, shape of tumor, concomitant presence of carcinoma in situ, preoperative intravesical therapy, number of transurethral resection of bladder tumor procedures or the presence of hydronephrosis were significantly associated with ureteral involvement in the univariate analysis.
Transgenic mice with cardiomyocyte-directed expression of the transcriptional repressor CREM-IbDeltaC-X (CREM-TG) represent an experimental model of atrial fibrillation (AF) that shows a gradual, age-dependent progression from atrial ectopy to persistent AF.
Reduced expression of genes regulated by the transcription factors CREB/CREM (cAMP response element-binding protein/modulator) is linked to atrial fibrillation (AF) susceptibility in patients.
Moreover, these data highlight a previously undescribed role for 5-HT6 receptors to modulate basal GABA and stimulated glutamate transmission, as well as reveal a potential therapeutic role for this receptor in the treatment of some types of anxiety-related disorders (eg OCD).
Most importantly, transfection of miR-146a in a neuroblastoma cell line caused the downregulation of IL-1 receptor-associated kinase 1 (Irak1) levels, suggesting that the identified defect of miR-146a in Rett syndrome mice brains might be responsible for the observed upregulation of Irak1 in this model of the human disease.
Increased transcript levels of Irak1, Fxyd1, Reln, and Gtl2 may contribute to the neuronal dysfunction in MeCP2-deficient mice and individuals with Rett syndrome.
The first patient, a 35 year-old man had a multisystemic disease, with clinical symptoms of bilateral cataract, sensori-neural hearing loss, myopathy, ataxia, cardiac arrhythmia, depression and short stature and carried a 7970 G&gt;T (E129X) nonsense mutation in COII.
Here we investigate the impact of LC degeneration in a mouse model of tauopathy by lesioning the LC of male and female P301S tau transgenic mice with the neurotoxin N-(2-chloroethyl)-N-ethyl-bromobenzylamine (DSP-4) starting at 2 months of age.
Additional noradrenergic depletion by injection of N-(2-chloroethyl)-N-ethyl-2-bromobenzylamine (DSP-4) aggravated pain hypersensitivity in PD rats.
We investigated for the first time the levels of non-protein-bound iron (NPBI), a pro-oxidant factor, and 4-hydroxynonenal protein adducts (4-HNE PAs), as a marker of lipid peroxidation-induced protein damage, in classic autism.
The patients were divided into two groups: Group A included 17 patients with and group B 42 patients without paraesophageal varices on presclerotherapy computer tomography.
Other studies suggest that monitoring of monocyte chemoattractant protein-1(MCP-1), interleukin (IL)-17, GATA-3 (the key transcription factor of type 2 T helper cells) and forkhead box P3 (FOXP3, the key transcription factor of regulatory T cells) mRNA level in urinary sediment may provide an early clue for detecting disease flare in lupus patients.
ILC-2 express GATA3, produce IL-4, IL-5, IL-13 and amphiregulin, protect against parasitic infections and are related to allergy and obesity immunopathology.
Previous animal studies have shown that administration of FGF21 ameliorates kidney function, morphological glomerular abnormalities, dyslipidemia, hyperglycemia, insulin resistance, oxidative stress and obesity.
In recent clinical trials, an FGF21 analogue reduced insulin levels and body weight, and ameliorated dyslipidemia in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus and obesity, all of which are well-known risk factors for kidney disease.
FGF21 is a novel biomarker for non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) in humans and limits hepatotoxicity in mice.
Consistent with this, Fgf21 can rescue Dnmt3a-mediated insulin resistance, and DNA methylation at the FGF21 locus was elevated in human subjects with diabetes and correlated negatively with expression of FGF21 in human adipose tissue.
MT can modulate various stress-induced signalling pathways of MAPKs, Wnt, NF-kB, PI3K, Sirt-1/AMPK and FGF21 signalling to alleviate diabetes and diabetic complications.
Berberine acts in the liver to regulate lipid utilization and maintain whole-body energy metabolism, and berberine-mediated autophagy and FGF21 activation have the therapeutic potential for treating metabolic defects under nutrition overload, such as fatty liver diseases, type 2 diabetes and obesity.
Fibroblast growth factor 21 (FGF-21) is mainly secreted by liver and has been reported to be involved in the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes.
Some prospective studies have shown a positive association between FGF-21 and diabetes risk.
Therefore, we prospectively evaluated the sex-specific association between FGF-21 and diabetes in a Chinese population.
Serum FGF-21 concentration was measured in a case-control study comprising of 251 incident diabetes cases and 251 age-sex-matched controls nested within a prospective population-based cohort, the Singapore Chinese Health Study.
After adjustment for risk biomarkers of diabetes including lipids, liver enzymes and inflammatory marker, the OR of type 2 diabetes with per one unit increment in log FGF-21 concentration was 1.16 (95% CI 0.90-1.50).
Higher serum FGF-21 level was associated with an increased risk of diabetes in Chinese women but not in men.
The sex difference in the association between FGF-21 and diabetes risk deserves further investigation and replication in other populations.
The aim of this study was to examine the combined and independent effects of hyperglycemia and hyperinsulinemia on total and bioactive FGF21 in the postprandial period in humans, and determine whether this effect is attenuated in conditions of altered insulin secretion and action.
Circulating glucose, insulin, total and bioactive FGF21, and fibroblast activation protein were measured in adults with and without type 2 diabetes (T2D) following an oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT), and under a series of insulin and glucose clamp conditions and following high-fat diet in healthy adults.
Our study demonstrates that haploinsufficiency of DYRK1A results in a new recognizable syndrome, which should be considered in individuals with Angelman syndrome-like features and distinct facial features.
The DYRK1A gene was studied by direct sequencing and quantitative PCR in a cohort of 105 patients with ID and at least two symptoms from the Angelman syndrome spectrum (microcephaly &lt; -2.5 SD, ataxic gait, seizures and speech delay).
To determine the role of IRAK-M in host defense against bacterial pneumonia, IRAK-M-deficient (IRAK-M(-/-)) and normal wild-type (WT) mice were infected intranasally with Klebsiella pneumoniae.
The prevalence of autistic traits consistent with a clinical diagnosis for an autism spectrum disorder (ASD) was 5.5 % (n = 3 MtF and n = 2 FtM) compared to reports of clinical diagnoses of 0.5-2.0 % in the general population.
A total of 88 self-identified male-to-female transsexuals (MtF), 43 female-to-male transsexuals (FtM), 62 females with an eating disorder, 56 male controls, and 116 female controls completed the Eating Disorder Examination Questionnaire, Eating Disorder Inventory, Body Checking Questionnaire, Drive for Muscularity Scale, Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale, and Beck Depression Inventory.
It was: xA-E-E-A-P-R-R-V-K-L-S-Q-R-Q-M-Q-E-L-K-E-A-F-T-M-I-D-Q-D-R-D-G-F-I-G-M- E-D-L-K-D-M-F-S-S-L-G-R-V-P-P-D-D-E-L-N-A-M-L-K-E-C-P-G-Q-L-N-F-T- A-F-L-T-L-F-G-E-K-V-S-G-T-D-P-E-D-A-L-R-N-A-F-S-M-F-D-E-D-G-Q-G-F-I-P- E-D-Y-L-K-D-L-L-E-N-M-G-D-N-F-S-K-E-E-I-K-N-V-W-K-D-A-P-L-K-N-K-Q-F- N-Y-N-K-M-V-D-I-K-G-K-A-E-D-E-D.
Two-dimensional speckle tracking (2-D ST) echocardiography, a new imaging modality with useful applications in several cardiac diseases, has been validated for subjects with myocardial infarction against cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR).
Neurodegenerative processes (viz., stroke, dementia, Parkinsonism, epilepsy, etc) uncover BPAg1-n, an alternatively spliced form of BPAg1-e that stabilizes the cytoskeleton of sensory neurons, generating autoantibodies that may subsequently lead to BP by cross-reacting with BPAg1-e. We present a patient with Parkinsonism who later developed blisters, erosions and crusts localized to the palms and soles, confirmed histopathologically as bullous pemphigoid.
Recent studies have shown that an elevated ambulatory or home blood pressure (BP) in the absence of office BP-a phenomenon called masked hypertension-is associated with poor cardiovascular prognosis.
We have recently reported that vitreous levels of IL-4, IL-17A, IL-22, IL-31, and TNFAlfa are higher than the respective serum levels in proliferative diabetic retinopathy (PDR) patients, and that vitreous levels of these cytokines are higher in PDR than in other non-inflammatory vitreoretinal diseases or uveitis associated with sarcoidosis.
Using a cross-sectional patient study and a well-characterized murine model of DED, herein we investigated the immunoregulatory function of interleukin-22 (IL-22) in the pathogenesis of DED.
We found that IL-22 levels were elevated in lacrimal fluids of DED patients and inversely correlated with severity of disease.
Moreover, loss of function analyses using IL-22 knockout mice demonstrated that IL-22 is essential for suppression of ocular surface infiltration of Th17 cells and inhibition of DED induction.
Our novel findings elucidate immunoregulatory function of LG-derived IL-22 in inhibiting IL-17-mediated ocular surface epitheliopathy in DED thus making IL-22 a new relevant therapeutic target.
Recent studies have reported the increased number of IL-22 producing T cells in patients with autoimmune noninfectious uveitis; however, the correlation between IL-22 and uveitis remains unclear.
In this study, we aimed to determine the specific role of IL-22 and its receptor in the pathogenesis of uveitis.
Serum concentration of IL-22 was significantly increased in uveitis patients.
Experimental animal models of uveitis induced by interphotoreceptor retinoid binding protein 1-20 (IRBP1-20) exhibited elevation of hyperplasia RPE and IL-22 production.
When CD4+ T cells from the uveitis patients were stimulated with IRBP1-20, the production of IL-22 definitely increased.
In addition, we examine the regulatory role of cysteamine, which has an anti-inflammatory role in the cornea, in uveitis through the down-regulation of IL-22RAlfa expression.
Cysteamine effectively suppressed the IRBP1-20-induced IL-22RAlfa expression and prevented the development of IRBP1-20-induced uveitis in the experimental animal model.
These finding suggest that IL-22 and its receptor have a crucial role in the development and pathogenesis of uveitis by facilitating inflammatory cell infiltration, and that cysteamine may be a useful therapeutic drug in treating uveitis by down-regulating IL-22RAlfa expression in RPE.
The serum of 20 active scleritis patients not treated with any local, periocular, or systemic immunomodulatory therapy (IMT) was analysed with multiplex assay to determine the levels of 11 cytokines interleukin (IL)-1Beta, IL-6, IL-2, IFN-Gamma, IL-10, IL-12p40, IL-13, IL-17A, IL-5, TNF-Alfa, and TNF-Beta, and with ELISA to determine the levels of TGF-Beta1, IL-22, and IL-23.
Serum IL-22 levels from patients with active scleritis were correlated with type of scleritis (non-necrotizing and necrotizing), degree of inflammation (0-4+ :&lt;=2+ and &gt;2+), and associated systemic disease.
Serum levels of IL-22 were elevated in active scleritis patients compared to controls (6.41 +/- 1.52 pg/ml versus 1.93 +/- 0.39 pg/ml, p = 0.012) and significantly decreased after scleritis remission with the use of IMT (p = 0.005).
In our study cohort, IL-22 serum levels were significantly elevated in active scleritis patients compared to controls and decreased significantly after remission.
Our results suggest that IL-22, a T helper (Th) 17- and Th22- derived cytokine, may play a critical role in the physiopathology of scleritis.
However, it is unclear whether and how non-proliferative diabetic retinopathy (NPDR) is affected by Interleukin-17A (IL-17A) and Interleukin-22 (IL-22), two well-known inflammatory factors, and irisin, a novel potential anti-inflammatory factor.
To assess changes in the salivary expression of IL-1Alfa, IL-1Beta, IL-2, IL-6, IL-10, IL-17, and TNF in acute leukemia (AL) patients before and during chemotherapy, and its association with HSV infection, oral candidiasis (OC), and oral mucositis (OM) onset.
Together, this study shows an association between clinical forms of oral candidiasis and the number of colonies of C. albicans in saliva, and that a systemic immune response characterized by the production of TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma is observed in patients with oral candidiasis.
However, the relationship between MCPIP1 and myocardial ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) injury remained illdefined.
The present study seeks to determine whether monocyte chemotactic protein-induced protein 1 (MCPIP1), a recently identified modulator of inflammatory reactions, is involved in the cerebral neuroprotection conferred by minocycline treatment in the animal model of focal cerebral ischemia and to elucidate the mechanisms of minocycline-induced ischemic brain tolerance.
Focal cerebral ischemia was induced by middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) for 2 h in male C57BL/6 mice and MCPIP1 knockout mice followed by 24- or 48-h reperfusion.
Our in vitro and in vivo studies demonstrate that MCPIP1 is an important mediator of minocycline-induced protection from brain ischemia.
The objective of the present study was to investigate whether MCPIP exerts an inhibitory effect on the cardiac inflammatory response and adverse remodeling after myocardial infarction (MI).
The diminishment in atherosclerosis in bone marrow MCPIP1(-/-) mice may be partially attributed to the slight decrease in their plasma lipids.
The present study seeks to determine the involvement of monocyte chemotactic protein-induced protein 1 (MCPIP1), a recently identified novel modulator of inflammatory reactions, in the cerebral neuroprotection conferred by EA pretreatment in the animal model of focal cerebral ischemia and to elucidate the mechanisms of EA pretreatment-induced ischemic brain tolerance.
Twenty-four hours after the end of the last EA pretreatment, focal cerebral ischemia was induced by middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) for 90 minutes in male C57BL/6 mice and MCPIP1 knockout mice.
Our data demonstrated that MCPIP1 deficiency caused significant lack of EA pretreatment-induced cerebral protective effects after MCAO compared with the control group and that MCPIP1 is involved in EA pretreatment-induced delayed brain ischemia tolerance.
This study seeks to determine if monocyte chemotactic protein-induced protein 1 (MCPIP1), a recently identified CCCH Zn finger-containing protein, plays a role in focal brain ischemia and to elucidate the mechanisms of LPS-induced ischemic brain tolerance.
Mouse microglia was prepared from cortices of C57BL/6 mouse brain and primary human microglia was acquired from Clonexpress, Inc. Wild type and MCPIP1 knockout mice were treated with LPS (0.2 mg/kg) 24 hours before brain ischemia induced by transient middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO).
Our data indicate that absence of MCPIP1 exacerbates ischemic brain damage by upregulation of proinflammatory cytokines and that MCPIP1 participates in LPS-induced ischemic stroke tolerance.
By contrast, the IGFBP-rPs were distributed paraphyletically into two clades: IGFBP-rP1, 5, and 6 in one clade and the CCN family (IGFBP-rP2-4,7-9) in another.
qPCR confirmed the upregulation of insulin-like growth factor-binding protein (IGFBP)-3 and IGFBP-rP1 (p = 0.029, p = 0.0002), while expression of IGFBP-5, -rP2 (CTGF), -rP4 (Cyr61), FOSL1, LOXL2, OAZ1 and CDK4 was not different between groups.
Meta-analysis results indicated that, compared with normal protein diet, low-protein diet (LPD) supplemented with keto analogues (sLPD) could improve serum albumin (P &lt; 0.00001), hyperparathyroidism (P &lt; 0.00001) and hyperphosphatemia (P = 0.008).
To understand whether these mediators are important in muscle wasting in cancer patients, levels of the phospho forms of PKR and eIF2alpha have been determined in rectus abdominus muscle of weight losing patients with oesophago-gastric cancer, in comparison with healthy controls.
SPC24 is over-expressed in clinical lung adenocarcinoma samples, and high level of SPC24 is associated with advanced stages of lung tumors.
To reveal the role of SPC24, an important component of kinetochore, in the tumorigenesis of lung cancer, we performed Oncomine and immunohistochemistry (IHC) analyses for SPC24 in human lung adenocarcinoma tumors.
We knocked down SPC24 in two non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines, PC9 and A549, by siRNA and evaluated cell proliferation, apoptosis, and migration in the SPC24-deficient cells.
We further performed multiple Oncomine expression analyses for SPC24 in various lung cancer datasets with important clinical characteristics and risk factors, including survival, recurrence, and smoking status.
SPC24 is a novel oncogene of lung cancer, and can serve as a promising prognostic biomarker to differentiate lung tumors that have various clinicopathological characteristics.
Treatment with 3,3'-iminodipropionitrile, which induces aberrant phosphorylation of NF in the perikarya of neurons and causes neuropathy, induced oocyte degeneration with follicular atresia, phosphorylation of NF-H in oocytes, and ovarian gene expression of cyclin-dependent kinase 5, a candidate kinase of NF-H.
To explore the role of cyclin dependent kinase 5 (CDK5) in 2, 5-hexanedione (HD)-induced neuropathy.
HD can induce significant changes of CDK5 and its activators p35, p25 in nerve tissues, which may be related to the neuropathy induced by HD.
To investigate the mechanisms of the neuropathy induced by HD, the contents and activities of cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (CDK5) and activators (p35 precursor, p35 and p25) in rats' cerebrum cortex (CC), spinal cord (SC) and sciatic nerve (SN) were determined.
The inconsistent changes of CDK5 activities in CNS and PNS might delegate the different mechanisms of HD-induced peripheral neuropathy.
In the past decade, a growing number of regulatory non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) including microRNAs (miRNAs) and long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) have been identified to be strongly associated with schizophrenia.
However, the studies of these ncRNAs in the pathophysiology of schizophrenia and the reverting of their genetic defects in restoration of the normal phenotype have been hampered by insufficient technology to manipulate these ncRNA genes effectively as well as a lack of appropriate animal models.
In this review article, we mainly focus on the schizophrenia-related ncRNAs and the use of CRISPR/Cas9-mediated editing on the non-coding regions of the genomic DNA in proving causal relationship between the genetic defects and the pathophysiology of schizophrenia.
This review describes the application of the powerful and feasible CRISPR/Cas9 technology to manipulate schizophrenia-associated ncRNA genes.
In contrast to reports on ncRNAs in affective disorders, schizophrenia and anxiety disorders, manuscripts on ncRNAs in posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and associated animal models are scarce.
A novel class of ncRNA-derived small RNAs, shown to be strongly induced during an early phase of learning in mouse, is also expressed in man, and at least one representative (SNORD85) was strongly down-regulated in schizophrenia synaptosomes.
We then discuss the possibility that ncRNA regulation of schizophrenia risk genes may underlie the diverse findings of genetic linkage studies including that protein-altering gene polymorphisms are not generally found in schizophrenia.
Despite the strength of the association of multiple sclerosis (MS) and human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-DR2, other genetic elements could have a role in the pathophysiology of MS. We investigated possible associations with polymorphic susceptibility genes located within the HLA complex, i.e., heat-shock protein (HSP)70-1, HSP70-2, and HSP70-hom in Japanese patients with MS.
The mRNA expression levels of c2orf68 were examined in 30 pairs of human colorectal adenocarcinoma tissues and adjacent normal colorectal tissues by qRT-PCR.
The present study aimed to evaluate the expression of NM_001013649.3 in human colorectal adenocarcinoma tissue and its correlation with clinicopathological aspects of the disease.
Reverse transcription quantitative real-time PCR was used to assess the expression levels of NM_001013649.3 in cancer and adjacent normal colorectal tissues from 30 patients with colorectal adenocarcinoma.
The mRNA levels of NM_001013649.3 are significantly down-regulated in colorectal adenocarcinoma tissue, and this down-regulation is most likely correlated with the differentiation status of the cancer, indicating that NM_001013649.3 is potentially involved in the pathogenesis of colorectal adenocarcinoma.
We investigated the localization of pituitary homeo box 1 (Ptx1) protein in five human non-neoplastic pituitaries and 73 of all types of pituitary adenomas using immunohistochemistry, and the expression of Ptx1 messenger RNA (mRNA) in 18 representative pituitary adenomas using the reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) technique.
Ptx1 was detected in 10/14 (71.4%) of growth hormone (GH)-secreting adenomas, 12/12 (100%) of prolactin (PRL)-secreting adenomas, 18/20 (90%) of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)-secreting adenomas, 6/7 (85.7%) of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)-secreting adenomas, and 17/20 (85%) of clinically non-functioning adenomas, including 9/10 (90%) of gonadotropin-subunit-positive adenomas.
Thus, there was no relationship between Ptx1 expression and a particular type of pituitary adenomas.
By RT-PCR analysis, Ptx1 mRNA was expressed in all 18 cases of pituitary adenomas, including two cases negative for Ptx1 protein by immunohistochemistry.
Clusters defining naive (NKG2A(+)CD57(-)NKG2C(-)) NK cell repertoires in the donor were associated with decreased risk for relapse in recipients with acute myeloid leukemia and myelodysplastic syndrome (hazard ratio [HR], 0.09; 95% confidence interval [CI]: 0.03-0.27; p &lt; 0.001).
To investigate the expression of acetyl coenzyme A synthetase short-chain family member 2 (ACSS2) in patients with colorectal cancer (CRC) and its biological role.
In addition, ACSS2 S659 phosphorylation positively correlates with AMPK activity in glioma specimens and grades of glioma malignancy.
Although ACSS2 function in cancer cells has been elucidated, its essentiality in ruminant mammary lipogenesis is unknown.
Moreover, acyl-CoA synthetase short-chain family member 2 (ACSS2), a direct SREBP2 target, provided a growth advantage to cancer cells under acidic pH.
In vivo studies revealed that in addition to nucleo-cytoplasmic acetate assimilating enzyme ACSS2, mitochondrial ACSS1 was critical for melanoma tumor growth in mice.
KEGG enrichment analysis indicated upregulated DEGs were involved in Renin-angiotensin system (e.g., Agt, angiotensinogen) and Wnt signaling pathway (e.g., Dkk1), while downregulated DEGs participated in Basal cell carcinoma (e.g., Lef1).
Concurrent with the inhibition of Wnt/Beta-catenin signaling, 1-benzyl-I3C strongly down regulated expression of the melanoma master regulator, Microphthalmia Associated Transcription Factor isoform-M (MITF-M) by inhibiting promoter activity through the consensus LEF-1/TCF DNA binding site.
Lymphoid enhancer binding factor 1 (LEF-1) has recently been reported as a potential immunohistochemical (IHC) marker for basal cell adenoma (BCA) and other salivary gland tumors, which may contribute to an increased accuracy in differentiating basaloid salivary gland neoplasms.
We evaluated the utility of LEF-1 in fine needle aspiration (FNA) and resection specimens to distinguish pleomorphic adenoma (PA), BCA, basal cell adenocarcinoma (BCAC), and adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC) as well as in non-neoplastic salivary gland (NNSG).
When comparing benign (PA and BCA) and the most common malignant basaloid salivary gland tumor (ACC), positive LEF-1 favors a benign neoplasm.
Preclinical studies have demonstrated the potential of inhibitors that target WNT receptor complexes at the cell membrane or that block the interaction of Beta-catenin with lymphoid enhancer-binding factor 1 and the androgen receptor, in preventing prostate cancer progression.
Taken together, our data suggested that MALAT1-miR-503-PI3K/Akt/mTOR/Snail pathway plays critical roles in silica-induced pulmonary fibrosis.
We identified trihydroxyphenolic compounds as potent blockers of TGF-Beta1 responses (IC50 ~50 nM), Snail1 expression, and collagen deposition in vivo in models of pulmonary fibrosis and collagen-dependent lung cancer metastasis.
Metagenomic analysis revealed direct correlation among PPARGC1A, zinc-finger transcription factor snail homolog 1 (SNAI1), and metastatic lung disease.
To discuss the abnormal expression of Wnt inhibitory factor (WIF1) in hepatocellular carcinoma cells and its regulating effect on the hepatocellular carcinoma invasion and metastasis factors of tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinases-3 (TIMP-3) and caveolin-1.
RT-PCR and Western blot were employed to detect the expression of WIF1 in six hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines of HepG2, Hep3B, Huh7, PLC/PRF/5, SMMC-7721 and MHCC97 and the immortalized human liver cell line THLE-3.
Besides, Lipofectamine 2000 was employed to transfect the eukaryotic expression vector pcDNA3.1-WIF1 and blank plasmid pcDNA3.1 into hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines.
Transwell assay was used to detect the effect of WIF1 on the invasion ability of hepatocellular carcinoma cells; Western blot was used to detect the effect of WIF1 on the expression of TIMP-3 and caveolin-1 in hepatocellular carcinoma cells, it also discussed the effect on the expression of Beta-catenin.
The expression of WIF1 in hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines was lower than that in the normal liver cell lines (P &lt; 0.01); while there was basically no expression of WIF1 in the human highly metastatic cell line MHCC-97 and moderate expression in HepG2 and SMMC-7721.
After transfecting the eukaryotic expression vector pcDNA3.1-WIF1 and blank plasmid pcDNA3.1 into hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines, compared with the blank plasmid group, the cell viability and invasion ability in the WIF1 group were all reduced (P &lt; 0.01), the expression of TIMP-3, caveolin-1 and mRNA were all down-regulated (P &lt; 0.01), and the expression of Beta-catenin was decreased (P &lt; 0.01).
Because of down-regulation or missing of expression of WIF1 in hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines, the up-regulation of WIF1 expression can significantly inhibit the invasion and metastasis of HepG2 and SMMC-7721 of hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines, which are related to the up-regulated expression of TIMP-3 and down-regulated expression of caveolin-1 and may be realized through the Wnt/Beta-catenin signaling pathway.
The aim of the present study was to investigate the effect of anti-estrogen treatment (fulvestrant) on the biological activity of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), involving the estrogen receptor Alfa (ERAlfa) and Wnt pathways, and to evaluate whether ERAlfa and Wnt inhibitory factor-1 (WIF1) could be biomarkers for anti-estrogen clinical therapy.
Recently, Wnt inhibitory factor-1 (WIF-1) was found to be epigenetically inactivated in several solid tumors, but the biological and clinical relevance of WIF-1 methylation and expression status in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) are still unclear.
To examine the expression profile and promoter methylation status of WIF-1 in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and identify the possible relationship between the WIF-1 expression pattern and promoter methylation status.
Treatment of established hepatocellular carcinoma tumors with Ad-WIF1-Fc and/or Ad-sFRP1-Fc resulted in significant inhibition of tumor growth and prolonged animal survival.
To investigate the promoter methylation status and mRNA expression of DKK-3 and WIF-1 gene in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
Differential high-throughput drug screening of c.1380delA CDH1 SB.mhdgc-1 versus sporadic gastric cancer cells identified several compound classes with enriched activity in c.1380 CDH1 SB.mhdgc-1 cells including mTOR (Mammalian Target Of Rapamycin), MEK (Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase), c-Src kinase, FAK (Focal Adhesion Kinase), PKC (Protein Kinase C), or TOPO2 (Topoisomerase II) inhibitors.
The objective of this study was to validate the Korean version of the Quality of Life-Cancer Survivors (QOL-CS-K) in a sample of lymphoma survivors.
The QOL-CS-K is a reliable and valid scale for measuring the QOL in long-term lymphoma survivors.
In particular, we focused on understanding the implications of the novel interaction between these two pathways in primary pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma tumor cells and provide the first evidence that this mechanism has implications for overcoming the resistance against experimental drugs targeting Ref-1 activity, with clear translational implications.
The second phosphotyrosine binding domain (PTB2) of the human scaffolding protein FE65 interacts with the C-terminal part of the Amyloid Precursor Protein (APP) involved in Alzheimer's disease.
Through the PTB2 domain, they all interact with the Alzheimer's disease amyloid precursor protein (APP) intracellular domain (AICD) and can alter APP processing.
In this report we present two cases with inferior myocardial infarction that was likely caused by thrombotic occlusion of CAEs.
Autoantibodies were measured against glutamic acid decarboxylase-65 (GAD65), a CNS autoantigen proposed to be associated with autism and against Ro52, glial fibrillary acidic protein, tyrosine hydroxylase, aquaporin-4, and gamma-enolase, the mouse mammary tumor virus and the xenotropic murine leukemia virus.
To determine circulating soluble vascular adhesion protein-1 (sVAP-1) levels and their clinical associations in patients with systemic sclerosis (SSc).
Serum VAP-1 levels were examined by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay in 71 SSc patients, 13 systemic lupus erythematosus patients and 50 healthy individuals.
Serum sVAP-1 levels were significantly elevated in SSc patients (617.2 +/- 338.7 ng/mL) compared with healthy individuals (320.2 +/- 144.2 ng/mL; P &lt; 0.001) and patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (329.0 +/- 176.1 ng/mL; P &lt; 0.001).
We have used single and multiple site-directed mutagenesis, and molecular modeling, to identify critical residues in the DNA binding site of MAb 2C10, an IgG anti-dsDNA autoantibody from an MRL/lpr lupus mouse.
Antibodies H241 and 2C10 are lupus mouse IgG autoantibodies that bind native DNA.
Nucleic acid specificity was tested for two monoclonal anti-double-stranded DNA autoantibodies, 2C10 and H241, derived from two lupus-prone MRL/Mp-lpr/lpr mice.
VAP-1 was expressed on sinusoidal and vascular endothelium in non-inflamed liver and in inflamed liver from patients with either allograft rejection or primary biliary cirrhosis.
Aims-To investigate the ability of circulating IgG autoanti-IgE antibodies from atopic rhinitis patients to block the binding of IgE to its low affinity receptor (FcepsilonRII), also termed CD23.Methods-This involved the use of a well validated flow cytometric method to detect inhibition of FITC labelled IgE binding to human B cells expressing CD23 (RPMI 8866 cell line).Results-Taking inhibition values greater than 20% as being significant, 15 out of 20 IgG anti-IgE containing sera inhibited the binding of IgE-FITC to the RPMI 8866 cells.
In this study, we aim to investigate whether miR-338* (miR-338-5p), which has been found to be associated with tumor progression, is associated with pathological process of pulmonary fibrosis.
Exploratory immunohistochemical analysis of HLA-DRA and BTNL2 expression in papulopustular rosacea lesions from six individuals, including one with the rs763035 variant, revealed staining in the perifollicular inflammatory infiltrate of rosacea for both proteins.
We have earlier reported that diverse collagen vascular diseases, including arthritis, arteritis, thrombosis, myocarditis, myositis, sialo-/dacryoadenitis and dermatitis develop with the advent of autoantibodies in transgenic rats carrying the LTR-env-pX gene of human T lymphocyte virus type I (LTR-env-pX rats).
Child fat mass and fat mass distribution did not differ between the intervention and control group (MD 2.10, 95% CI -0.48 to 4.68; one trial, 115 participants, MD -0.50, 95% CI -1.69 to 0.69; one trial, 165 participants, respectively).One study (117 infants) reported a significant difference in infant allergy at short-term follow-up (risk ratio (RR) 0.13, 95% CI 0.02 to 0.95), but not at medium-term follow-up (RR 0.52, 95% CI 0.17 to 1.59).We found no significant difference in two trials evaluating postpartum depression.
The harmonic force field was used to calculate vibrational corrections to the rotational constants of both species and thus the zero-point average structures for both species were derived; AsH2: rz(AsH) = 1.53436(15) Aa, thetaz(HAsH) = 90.695(20) degrees, and AsD2: rz(AsD) = 1.52902(13) Aa, thetaz(DAsD) = 90.722(17) degrees, where the errors in parentheses are due to residual inertial defects of the corrected moments of inertia.
From the difference between the rz structures for AsH2 and AsD2 the re structure of AsH2 is estimated to be re(AsH) = 1.5158(6) Aa, thetae(HAsH) = 90.79(8) degrees.
To study the possible role of T cells bearing the gamma delta T cell receptor (TCR) heterodimer in the pathogenesis of autoimmune chronic active hepatitis (AI-CAH) and primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) in children, we measured levels of gamma delta+ T cells in the peripheral blood, assessed the proportion of cells bearing the disulphide-linked (BB3+) and non-disulphide-linked (A13+) subtypes of the receptor, and studied the co-expression of TCR-gamma delta and the activation markers HLA-DR and IL-2 receptor (IL-2R), and the memory cell marker CD45RO.
The RPH3AL, which is located at 17p13, has been identified from a candidate 17p13 medulloblastoma tumor suppressor locus.
We determined the exon-intron boundaries of RPH3AL and screened the coding region for mutations by direct sequencing in DNA extracted from 33 tumor samples with allelic loss of 17p13, including 10 medulloblastoma, 14 follicular thyroid cancer (FTC), and 9 ovarian cancer specimens.
Thus, despite its location in a homozygously deleted 17p13.3 locus, it is unlikely that RPH3AL is a gene involved in the oncogenesis of medulloblastoma, FTC, or ovarian cancer.
This finding supports the hypothesis that the decrease in CD28 expression, by CD8+ cells, is an event that takes place outside the spleen during human schistosomiasis infection.
The current study has compared the activation status and the expression of the CD28 molecule on circulating CD4+ and CD8+ lymphocytes from patients with different clinical forms of schistosomiasis.
These findings of a different percentage of circulating CD8+ CD28+ cells might explain the different in vitro cellular reactivity of asymptomatic and hepatosplenic patients and the defects in the cytokine secretion patterns reported in individuals with hepatosplenic schistosomiasis.
In Case 2, a 44-year-old Malay lady presented to our clinic with a progressive central scotoma in her right eye that she experienced since past 1 month.
This study reports the characterization of a novel human gene, chromosome 3 open reading frame 6 (C3orf6), mapped to chromosome 3q28, within the critical region of hereditary spastic paraplegia SPG14 locus.
The involvement of C3orf6 in the spastic paraplegia was investigated by sequencing all coding exons and flanking sequences in the SPG14 family, excluding the presence of causative mutations.
A retrospective study Tertiary referral center In this study, 13 patients who developed facial paralysis due to temporal bone trauma and undergone decompression by using MCF approach in Department of Otorhinolaryngology of Izmir Katip Celebi University Research and Training Hospital between January 1993 and December 2012 were presented retrospectively.
Its human ortholog, TFAP-2beta, causes Char disease and has also been linked to sleep disorders.
In vivo lentivirus-mediated RNA interference of AP-2Alfa reversed the inhibitory effects of aspirin on atherosclerosis in Apoe-/- mice.
Aspirin activates AP-2Alfa to upregulate IkBAlfa gene expression, resulting in attenuations of plaque development and instability in atherosclerosis.
Mutations in human AP-2 TF have been linked with bronchio-occular-facial syndrome and Char Syndrome, congenital birth defects characterized by craniofacial deformities and patent ductus arteriosus, respectively.
It is still an open question whether AP-2Gamma expression may be influenced by preeclampsia, which is a serious pregnancy complication, or by smoking, which has deleterious effects on trophoblastic development.
Thus, the expression of AP-2Gamma was studied in trophoblastic epithelium and endothelium of placentas from patients with preeclampsia (n = 43) and smokers (n = 45) as well as placentas of healthy pregnant women (control group, n = 26) between gestational ages 23 and 43 weeks.
A correlation between increased trophoblastic and endothelial AP-2Gamma expression in patients with preeclampsia and reduced trophoblastic invasion and migration in preeclampsia has to be discussed.
Furthermore, increased AP-2Gamma expression may play a protective role in preeclampsia, protecting from raised blood pressure.
Evaluation of dysmorphology by chromosome microarray (CMA) identified a 4.4 Mb deletion at chromosome 6p24 that included both TFAP2A and DSP, encoding desmoplakin, an additional component of the cardiac desmosome implicated in ARVD/C.
Mutations in transcription factor TFAP2B cause Char syndrome, a human disorder characterized by PDA, facial dysmorphysm and hand anomalies.
Loss of Tfap2b results in altered Bmp expression that may cause the heart-limb defects observed in Tfap2b mouse mutants and Char syndrome patients.
The present data suggest that AP-2 may suppress trophoblast migration and invasion, thus leading to a shallow placentation in preeclampsia.
PKD/AP2 system can be a potent pharmacological target for prevention of atherosclerosis.
In general, IMO is fatal, as patients fail to grow and expire  due to complications of the disease such as severe chronic anemia, bleeding, and/or infections.
Therefore, IL-7 delivery could represent a new therapeutic perspective to circumvent the lymphopenia observed in infantile malignant osteopetrosis patients.
The CD2 associated protein (CD2AP) is characterized as a T-lymphocyte CD2 adapter protein and is found to be related to glomerulosclerosis, and CD2AP knockout mice develop a rapid onset nephrotic syndrome and die of renal failure.
In vivo, to determine the effects of reduced Smad3 or CD2AP gene dosage on podocyte apoptosis and proteinuria characteristic of TGF-beta1 transgenic mice, we generated TGF-beta1 transgenic mice deficient for Smad3 or heterozygous for CD2AP.
Smad3 deficiency ameliorated podocyte apoptosis, and CD2AP heterozygosity increased both podocyte apoptosis and proteinuria.
However, the expression and biological function of NEAT1 in hepatoblastoma (HB) and the underlying mechanisms for the function of NEAT1 in HB remain largely uncharacterized.
The aim of this study was to investigate the role of NEAT1 in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), and probe whether NEAT1 participate in the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and metastasis regulated by HIF-2Alfa.
We investigated the role of Nuclear Paraspeckle Assembly Transcript 1 (NEAT1) lncRNA in promoting cholangiocarcinoma (CCA).
Long non-coding RNA nuclear-enriched abundant transcript 1 (NEAT1) was found to be participated in tumorigenesis in various cancers including hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
A BAP1 dependent alteration in expression of lncRNA NEAT-1 was identified by RT-PCR based lncRNA expression profiling, and an inverse relationship between this lncRNA and BAP1 was observed in analysis of the Tumor Cancer Genome Atlas cholangiocarcinoma dataset.
The pooled standard mean deviation (SMD) indicated that NEAT1 was down-regulated in esophageal carcinoma (ESCA, SMD = -0.35, 95% CI: -0.5~-0.20, P &lt; 0.0001) and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC, SMD = -0.47, 95% CI: -0.60~-0.34, P &lt; 0.0001), while in pancreatic cancer (PC), NEAT1 was up-regulated (SMD = 0.45, 95% CI: 0.2~0.71, P = 0.001).
However, NEAT1 expression in gastric cancer (GC), colorectal cancer (CRC), biliary tract cancer (BTC) and gallbladder carcinoma (GBC) showed no significant difference between cancer and control groups.
Aberrant overexpression of the long non-coding RNA NEAT1 (nuclear paraspeckle assembly transcript 1) has been documented in different types of solid tumours, such as lung cancer, oesophageal cancer, colorectal cancer and hepatocellular carcinoma, in which its high levels are associated with poor prognosis.
The role of lncRNA NEAT1 (nuclear paraspeckle assembly transcript 1, Gene ID: 283131) in colorectal cancer (CRC) keeps unknown.
RESULTS After successfully establishing a rapid atrial pacing of the left atrial appendage induced atrial fibrillation model, we found that expression of choline acetyl transferase, tyrosine hydroxylase, nerve growth factor, and neurturin was significantly higher in the rapid atrial pacing group than the control group (p&lt;0.05).
This study focused on cholinergic, choline acetyltransferase (ChAT)-immunopositive, and tyrosine hydroxylase (TH)-containing neurons in association with the vasculature to explore the neurovascular complex of the AD brain affected by stroke.
Choline acetyltransferase-positive (ChAT+) neurons within the subventricular zone (SVZ) have been shown to promote neurogenesis after stroke in mice by secreting acetylcholine (ACh); however, the mechanisms remain unclear.
In this study, we assessed whether these ChAT+ neurons also participate in stroke-induced neurogenesis.
We used a permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) model produced by transcranial electrocoagulation in mice, atropine (muscarinic cholinergic receptor [mAchR] antagonist), and donepezil (acetylcholinesterase inhibitor) to investigate the role of ChAT+ neurons in stroke-induced neurogenesis.
We conclude that ChAT+ neurons in the SVZ may participate in stroke-induced neurogenesis, suggesting a new mechanism for neurogenesis after stroke.
Mutations in the genes that encode mucosa-specific keratin-4 and keratin-13 are strongly linked to the manifestation of white sponge nevus.
This study involved mutational analysis of the genes encoding keratin-4 and keratin-13 in two Swedish families with white sponge nevus.
We describe a novel heterozygous missense mutation in the keratin-4 gene of a Swedish family with white sponge nevus.
Our results support the notion that mutations in keratin-4 and keratin-13 are the underlying cause of white sponge nevus.
The genes associated with WSN include mutant cytokeratin keratin 4 (KRT4) and keratin 13 (KRT13).
Keratin 4 (KRT4) and Keratin 13 (KRT13) gene mutations were involved in the WSN.
This may lead to alterations in integrity and differentiation of the tissue (as suggested by the up-regulation of KRT4 in the cholesteatoma).
Immunohistochemical study was carried out in 30 cholesteatoma tissues and 10 retroauricular skins to examine the expression of involucrin, filaggrin, cytokeratin 4, 10 and 16.
Cytokeratin 4 was expressed in basal layer of retroauricular skin, but occasionally expressed in suprabasal layer of cholesteatoma.
Mutations of keratin 4 or 13 gene have been identified as causing WSN.
The aim of this study is to determine whether keratin 4 or 13 gene mutation was the molecular basis of WSN in a Japanese family.
The authors identified a mutation of the keratin 4 gene recurrent in a family affected by WSN.
Muscle-specific ablation of the Alfa-thalassemia mental retardation syndrome mutant protein, Atrx, in transgenic mice results in animals with a severely reduced muscle mass at three weeks of age; yet this muscle mass reduction resolves by adult age.
Their diagnoses were compared with a final classification supported by immunohistochemistry (retinoblastoma (RB), death domain- associated protein (DAXX), and Alfa thalassemia/mental retardation syndrome X-linked (ATRX) protein expression), targeted mutation analysis (Memorial Sloan Kettering-Integrated Mutation Profiling of Actionable Cancer Targets), prior history of G1/G2 histology, and consensus.
We also evaluated the protein loss of O-6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) and alpha-thalassemia/mental retardation, X-linked (ATRX) during disease recurrence.
These mutations co-occur with other recurrent molecular alterations, including 1p/19q codeletions and tumor suppressor protein 53 (TP53) and alpha thalassemia/mental retardation (ATRX) mutations, which together help to define a molecular signature that aids in the classification of gliomas and helps to better predict clinical behavior.
Diffuse gliomas of WHO grade II and III diagnosed in our institute in the year 2016 were analysed for histological and IHC features, using the markers isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 (IDH1R132H) and Alfa thalassemia/mental retardation syndrome X-linked gene (ATRX).
Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining for isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 (IDH1), p53, alpha thalassemia/mental retardation syndrome X-linked (ATRX), and H3K27M, and direct DNA sequencing of IDH1/2, telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT) promoter, Histone H3.3 (H3F3A) and B-Raf (BRAF) genes was performed.
We propose that mutations in alpha thalassemia-mental retardation syndrome X-linked (ATRX)/death-domain associated protein (DAXX) prime ALT activation by disrupting telomeric heterochromatin.
In this study, anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) mutation and amplification, ALK protein expression, loss of the nuclear alpha thalassemia/mental retardation syndrome X-linked (ATRX) protein, and telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT) protein expression were studied to investigate potential correlations between these molecular characteristics and clinical features or outcomes in neuroblastoma.
Alpha-thalassemia/mental retardation syndrome X-linked (ATRX; OMIM #301040), which is caused by mutations in the ATRX gene, is characterized by alpha-thalassemia, distinct dysmorphic facies, psychomotor development delay and genital abnormalities.
The former retained alpha-thalassaemia/mental retardation X-linked (ATRX) immuno-expression and had absent staining for p53, while the latter had ATRX loss and p53 over-expression.
Although dysregulation of several HOX genes in ovarian cancer has been reported, little is known about HOXC6 expression in epithelial ovarian cancer.
In this report, analysis of laser capture microdissected samples determined HOXC6 expression patterns in normal versus malignant serous ovarian carcinoma tissues.
HOXC6 protein was quantified by ELISA in parallel serum samples and further validated in a larger cohort of serum samples collected from women with and without serous ovarian carcinoma.
These data demonstrate significant downregulation of HOXC6 in serous ovarian cancer.
After quantitative PCR analysis on tissue specimens and urinary sediments, eight promising biomarkers for the urinary detection of prostate cancer were selected (ONECUT2, HOXC4, HOXC6, DLX1, TDRD1, NKAIN1, MS4A8B, PPFIA2).
A urinary three-gene panel (HOXC6, TDRD1, and DLX1) had higher accuracy [area under the curve (AUC), 0.77; 95% confidence interval (CI), 0.71-0.83] to predict Gleason score &gt;=7 prostate cancer in biopsies compared with Progensa PCA3 (AUC, 0.68; 95% CI, 0.62-0.75) or sPSA (AUC, 0.72; 95% CI, 0.65-0.78).
The urinary three-gene panel (HOXC6, TDRD1, and DLX1) represents a promising tool to identify patients with aggressive prostate cancer, also in those with low sPSA values.
Overexpression of the classical homeobox transcription factor HOXC6 is frequent in prostate cancers and correlates with adverse clinical parameters.
Since surprisingly many HOXC6 target genes are downregulated in prostate cancer, it has been posited that oncogenic effects of HOXC6 in prostate cancer may be unmasked by concurrent epigenetic downregulation of target genes exerting tumor suppressive effects.
Our data support the hypothesis that HOXC6 target genes exerting tumor-suppressive effects are epigenetically downregulated in prostate cancer, but DNA methylation appears to follow or bolster rather than to cause their transcriptional inactivation.
Alzheimer's disease-related genes, such as APOE, A2M, PON2 and MAP4, and cardiovascular disease-associated genes, including COMT, CBS and WNK1, all congregated in a single module.
Histones H3 and H4 were hyperacetylated and H3 was di-methylated at K4 across the LCR, however, the H3 K4 MLL methyltransferase component Ash2L and histone acetyltransferases CBP and p300 occupied essentially only HS2 and the NF-E2 motif in HS2 was required for Ash2L recruitment.
SLC27A2, IL6 and TNFAlfa PBMC expression analysis resulted especially interesting to determine obesity-related n-3 LCPUFA insensitivity.
Interestingly, SLC27A2 expression correlated negatively with diabetes- and obesity-related traits in a replication cohort of 142 individuals.
We found that the ratio of CD8+CD28+/CD8+CD28- T lymphocytes decreased, as did the level of interleukin-7, but not IL-12p40, IL-13, or IL-15, in the blood; however, the ratio increased along with JAK3, STAT6, NFATc2, and GATA3 in the colon of the rats with colitis.
Here, we used an experimental model of colitis-associated colorectal carcinoma to investigate the contribution of NFATc2 to the promotion of colonic tumors.
Severe colitis in LRRK2-deficient mice was associated with enhanced nuclear localization of NFAT1.
In this study, we have identified a crucial regulatory role of the transcription factor NFATc2 in T cell-dependent experimental colitis.
Similar to ulcerative colitis in humans, the expression of NFATc2 was up-regulated in oxazolone-induced chronic intestinal inflammation.
Furthermore, NFATc2 deficiency suppressed colitis induced by oxazolone administration.
Administration of hyper-IL-6 blocked the protective effects of NFATc2 deficiency in experimental colitis, suggesting that IL-6 signal transduction plays a major pathogenic role in vivo.
Collectively, these results define a unique regulatory role for NFATc2 in colitis by controlling mucosal T cell activation in an IL-6-dependent manner.
NFATc2 in T cells thus emerges as a potentially new therapeutic target for inflammatory bowel diseases.
Relative risk(RR) from Poisson regression ranked dichotomized chylomicronemia risk factors for individuals, and population attributable fractions(PAF) for the community: type 2 diabetes, alcohol intake, obesity, fat intake, hypothyroidism, kidney function, education, sedentary lifestyle, menopause and hormone replacement (women).
For the community, top-ranked risk factors in women were menopause (PAF:63%), obesity (PAF:29%), and type 2 diabetes (PAF:15%).
Corresponding top-ranked risk factors in men were obesity (PAF:29%), type 2 diabetes (PAF:6.4%), and sedentary lifestyle (PAF:6.0%).
In the PAF group, asymptomatic patients were older (asymptomatic vs symptomatic group, 74.1 vs 71.1 years of age; P &lt; .01), more often male (62.1% vs 55.6%; P &lt; .01), and had a higher CHA2DS2-VASc (congestive heart failure, hypertension, age &gt;= 75 years, diabetes mellitus, history of stroke, vascular disease, age 65-74 years, and female sex) score (mean, 3.37 +/- 1.73 vs 2.99 +/- 1.63; P &lt; .01), whereas the prevalence of major co-morbidities and CHA2DS2-VASc scores were comparable in the SAF group.
PAFs of cerebrovascular diseases, hypertension, and diabetes were higher for males than for females; on the other hand, PAFs of orthopedic diseases were higher among females.
Predicting CVD, in the presence of general adiposity and its mediators, significant positive associations were found for hypercholesterolemia (1.59, 1.36-1.85, PAF 16.69), low HDL-C (1.21, 1.03-1.41, PAF 12.32), diabetes (1.86, 1.57-2.27, PAF 13.87), hypertension (1.79, 1.46-2.19, PAF 21.62) and current smoking (1.61, 1.34-1.94, PAF 7.57).
Predictors including diabetes (2.56, 2.08-3.16, PAF 24.37), hypertension (1.43, 1.11-1.84, PAF 17.13), current smoking (1.75, 1.38-2.22, PAF 7.71), and low education level (1.59, 1.01-2.51, PAF 27.08) were associated with higher risk, however, hypertriglyceridemia (0.83, 0.68-1.01) and being overweight (0.71, 0.58-0.87) were associated with lower risk.
Although micellar EKC gave baseline separation of a standard mixture of 10 EM, the LOQs using UV detection were not suitable for the assay of the low level estrogens in biological samples.
Recently, six patients with craniosynostosis and Noonan syndrome involving KRAS mutations were described in a review, and a patient with craniosynostosis and Noonan syndrome involving a SHOC2 mutation has also been reported.
Noonan syndrome shares clinical features with other rare conditions, including LEOPARD syndrome, cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome, Noonan-like syndrome with loose anagen hair, and Costello syndrome.
We previously reported that the p.Ser2Gly substitution in SHOC2 underlies Mazzanti syndrome, a RASopathy clinically overlapping Noonan syndrome, promoting N-myristoylation and constitutive targeting of the mutant to the plasma membrane.
Noonan syndrome with loose anagen hair (NS-LAH) is characterized by its distinctive hair anomalies, developmental differences, and structural brain abnormalities and is caused by a single recurrent missense SHOC2 mutation.
Most cases of Noonan syndrome (NS) result from mutations in one of the RAS-MAPK signaling genes, including PTPN11, SOS1, KRAS, NRAS, RAF1, BRAF, SHOC2, MEK1 (MAP2K1), and CBL.
We report a case of progressive radiculopathy in a 52-year-old man with spontaneously occurring cervical epidural hematoma (SCEH).
To the best of our knowledge, this is the second reported case in the worldwide literature of pure radiculopathy in a patient with chronic SCEH.
Here, we report that the tankyrase-binding protein TNKS1BP1 regulates actin cytoskeleton and cancer cell invasion, which is closely associated with cancer progression.
In clinical samples of pancreatic cancer, TNKS1BP1 expression was reduced in invasive regions.
We propose that the tankyrase-TNKS1BP1 axis constitutes a posttranslational modulator of cell invasion whose aberration promotes cancer malignancy.
But whether and how TNKS1BP1 associates with cancer is still not clear.
Here, we found that TNKS1BP1 was upregulated in human lung adenocarcinoma (LAC) tissues, and was associated with poor overall survival (OS) in LAC patients.
Overall, our study indicates that, in LAC, aberrant expressions of TNKS1BP1 are common events, and overexpression of TNKS1BP1 might affect outcomes of cancer patients to chemotherapy and radiotherapy.
Here we firstly identified that TNKS1BP1 was up-regulated by ionizing radiation (IR) and the depletion of TNKS1BP1 significantly sensitized cancer cells to IR.
TNKS1BP1 is a newly described component of the DNA DSB repair machinery, which provides much more mechanistic evidence for the rationale of developing effective anticancer measures by targeting PARP-1 and DNA-PKcs.
In addition, three novel miR-26b targets were identified (TNKS1BP1, CPSF7, COL12A1) and the expression of each in cancer stroma was shown to be significantly associated with breast cancer recurrence.
An increasing number of epileptic syndromes belongs to this group of rare disorders: Autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy is caused by mutations in a neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (affected genes: CHRNA4, CHRNB2), benign familial neonatal convulsions by mutations in potassium channels constituting the M-current (KCNQ2, KCNQ3), generalized epilepsy with febrile seizures plus by mutations in subunits of the voltage-gated sodium channel or the GABA(A) receptor (SCN1B, SCN1A, GABRG2), and episodic ataxia type 1-which is associated with epilepsy in a few patients--by mutations within another voltage-gated potassium channel (KCNA1).
In the present study, we characterized the hormonal regulation of proliferation of two immortalized cell lines, BLT-1, originating from a Leydig cell tumor, and NT-1, originating from a granulosa cell tumor.
We suggest screening for MYO1E and other non-COL4 'podocyte gene' mutations in XLAS when clinical nephropathy is more severe than expected for an individual's age and sex.
Activation of the transient receptor potential melastatin 2 (TRPM2) channel occurs during the response to oxidative stress under physiological conditions as well as in pathological processes such as ischemia and diabetes.
Otherwise, a fasting plasma glucose level &gt; or = 126 mg/dL or a 2-hour plasma glucose level &gt; or = 200 mg/dL after an oral glucose challenge of 75 g on 2 occasions is sufficient evidence upon which to diagnose diabetes mellitus.
MecTHaR TepanNR HecTepoNAHblMN npoTNBoBocnanNTenbHblMN npenapaTaMN N cNcTeMHoe ETNonorN4ecKoe ne4eHNe npN NHTpaoKynRpHoM BocnaneHNN Ha ooHe HZO no3BonNT yMeHbwNTb pNcK pa3BNTNR TRXenblx nocneAcTBNN peaKTNBamyNN BB3 N N3beXaTb pemyNANBoB 3aboneBaHNR BnocneAcTBNN.
MecTHaR TepanNR HecTepoNAHblMN npoTNBoBocnanNTenbHblMN npenapaTaMN N cNcTeMHoe ETNonorN4ecKoe ne4eHNe npN NHTpaoKynRpHoM BocnaneHNN Ha ooHe HZO no3BonNT yMeHbwNTb pNcK pa3BNTNR TRXenblx nocneAcTBNN peaKTNBamyNN BB3 N N3beXaTb pemyNANBoB 3aboneBaHNR BnocneAcTBNN.
y namyNeHToB, nony4aBwNx NHrNbNTopbl aHrNoTeH3NHnpeBpawahwero oepMeHTa, pNcK rocnNTanN3amyNN B Te4eHNe 6 Mec npN Ao3NpoBKe 25% N MeHee oT TepaneBTN4ecKoN cocTaBnRn 21,18% (oTHoweHNe waHcoB - OW 1,41 npN 95% AoBepNTenbHoM NHTepBane - ON oT 1,13 Ao 1,76), npN Ao3NpoBKe 50% oT TepaneBTN4ecKoN - 16% (OW 0,71 npN 95% ON oT 0,56 Ao 0,88), npN Ao3NpoBKe 100% TepaneBTN4ecKoN - 34% (OW 0,51 npN 95% ON oT 0,43 Ao 0,60).
Control cases of histologic mimics (biphasic synovial sarcoma, leiomyoma, leiomyosarcoma, desmoid-type fibromatosis, EWSR1-FLI1-positive Ewing sarcoma, Wilms' tumor, gastrointestinal stromal tumor, plexiform fibromyxoma, Sonic hedgehog-type medulloblastomas, and normal gastric mucosa and muscularis propria were also analyzed.
In light of the unusual findings in this case as well as the proximity of the EWSR1 locus and SMARCB1 locus on chromosome 22 and frequent CD99 staining in both tumors, we examined 16 ES cases and 17 ATRT, renal rhabdoid tumor (RRT), and extrarenal rhabdoid tumor (ERRT) cases for CD99 and INI1 staining and for EWSR1 rearrangement.
In light of the unusual findings in this case as well as the proximity of the EWSR1 locus and SMARCB1 locus on chromosome 22 and frequent CD99 staining in both tumors, we examined 16 ES cases and 17 ATRT, renal rhabdoid tumor (RRT), and extrarenal rhabdoid tumor (ERRT) cases for CD99 and INI1 staining and for EWSR1 rearrangement.
This report should increase awareness of pulmonary sarcoidosis development in patient treated with tumor necrosis factor-alpha blocking agent, etanercept.
We report on a 72 year-old woman with long-standing rheumatoid arthritis diagnosed as granulomatosis due to pulmonary sarcoidosis after 49 months of treatment with etanercept.
We present a case of probable pulmonary sarcoidosis associated with the use of etanercept for psoriatic arthritis.
Other cases of etanercept-induced granulomas and skin sarcoidosis were recently published in the medical literature, but we found only one case that involved lung sarcoidosis during etanercept therapy.
The C-4 2-pyridyl compounds (enantiomers) constitute a novel type of 1,4-dihydropyridine calcium channel modulator that could provide a new drug design concept directed toward the treatment of congestive heart failure, and for use as probes to study the structure-function relationships of calcium channels.
However, whether miR-300 could regulate the DNA damage responses induced by extrinsic genotoxic stress in human lung cancer and the underlying mechanism remain unknown.
In this study, the expression of miR-300 was examined in lung cancer cells treated with IR, and the effects of miR-300 on DNA damage repair, cell cycle arrest, apoptosis and senescence induced by IR were investigated.
Flow cytomertry analysis and colony formation assay showed that miR-300 desensitized lung cancer cells to IR by suppressing p53-dependent G2 cell cycle arrest, apoptosis and senescence.
These data demonstrate that miR-300 regulates the cellular sensitivity to IR through targeting p53 and apaf1 in lung cancer cells.
The study aims to verify the hypothesis that up-regulation of microRNA-300 (miR-300) targeting CUL4B promotes apoptosis and suppresses proliferation, migration, invasion, and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) of pancreatic cancer cells by regulating the Wnt/Beta-catenin signaling pathway.
Pancreatic cancer tissues showed increased CUL4B expression but decreased miR-300 expression.
Our study concludes that lowly expressed miR-300 may contribute to highly expressed CUL4B activating the Wnt/Beta-catenin signaling pathway and further stimulating EMT, thus promoting proliferation and migration but suppressing apoptosis of pancreatic cancer cells.
miR-300 has been demonstrated to play an important role in the progression of several tumors, but its role in tumorigenesis of laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma (LSCC) is still unclear.
The purpose of this study was to explore miR-300 expression in LSCC patients and analyze its association with clinicopathological factors and prognosis.
In the present study, we measured the expression level of miR-300 in LSCC tissues by RT-PCR.
miR-300 expression was significantly increased in LSCC tissues compared with that in adjacent non-cancerous tissues (p &lt; 0.01).
More importantly, Kaplan-Meier analysis showed that LSCC patients with low miR-300 expression tended to have shorter overall survival (p &lt; 0.001).
Finally, multivariate analysis revealed that miR-300 expression was an independent prognostic factor for LSCC patients.
Our results pointed to miR-300 as a powerful prognostic marker in LSCC and as a novel target for tumor-suppressive therapy.
Furthermore, we identified that miR-300, which has been reported as a suppressor in other types of cancer, is negatively regulated by TUG1.
In the present study, we found that miR-300 and p53 were significantly increased in colorectal cancer (CRC) tissues when compared with levels noted in adjacent colorectal tissues.
In this study, we showed that miR-300 expression was downregulated in LSCC tissues compared with adjacent no-tumor tissues.
Interesting, there were an inverse correlation between ROS1 and miR-300 expression in the LSCC tissues.
Therefore, our data suggested that miR-300 acted as a tumor suppressive gene in LSCC.
To investigate the interaction on smoking and the lung cancer related genes miR-196a2 rs11614913, miR-146a rs2910164, miR-300 rs12894467, miR-26a-1 rs7372209, miR-27a rs895819 in Fujian Han population.
The pathogenesis of celiac disease (CD) has been related to polymorphisms in the regulator of G-protein signaling 1 (RGS1) and interleukin-12 A (IL12A) genes, but the existing findings are inconsistent.
The RGS1 gene is associated with celiac disease, multiple sclerosis, and type I diabetes, which are all T cell-mediated pathologies, yet there is no reported analysis of regulator of G protein signaling (RGS)1 biology in human T cells.
The RGS1 risk allele is shared with celiac disease (CD), and the IL12A risk allele seems to be protective for celiac disease.
Recent genome-wide association studies have identified 1q31 (RGS1), 2q11-12 (IL18RAP), 3p21 (CCR1/CCR3/CCR2), 3q25-26 (IL12A/SCHIP1), 3q28 (LPP), 4q27 (IL2/IL21), 6q25 (TAGAP) and 12q24 (SH2B3) as susceptibility regions for coeliac disease (CD).
Three celiac disease loci--RGS1 on chromosome 1q31, IL18RAP on chromosome 2q12, and TAGAP on chromosome 6q25--were associated with type 1 diabetes (P&lt;1.00x10(-4)).
In this study, we investigated the role of PD-1 systemic engagement with PD-L1-Ig in lupus-like nephritis in SLE mice.
The systemic administration of PD-L1-Ig activated PD-1-PD-L1 axis of CD4+ T lymphocytes, suppressed Th17 formation in many organs, including the spleen and the kidney, demolished abnormal production of cytokines (IFN-Gamma, IL-17, and IL-10) and anti-dsDNA autoantibodies in serum, inhibited immunoglobulin G deposition in the glomeruli with the decrease of proteinuria, and activated T cells in urine.
Our research demonstrated that the protective function of systemic activation of PD-1-PD-L1 axis with PD-L1-Ig attenuates the nephritis in SLE-prone mice, which facilitates us to understand the suppressive function of PD-1-PD-L1 axis in the pathogenesis and progress of the lupus nephritis, and to explore a possible effective therapeutic strategy to SLE.
Lastly, the protective effect of CD28 blockade was associated with increased intrarenal expression of the immunoregulatory molecule, Indoleamine 2, 3-dioxygenase, of the co-inhibitory receptor programmed cell-Death - 1 (PD-1) and of its ligand programmed death ligand - 1 (PDL-1).In conclusion, CD28 blockade prevented the development of lupus nephritis in NZB/NZW F1 mice.
PD-L1 expression on tumor cells was higher in patients with preoperative chronic kidney disease (CKD) stage 4-5 than in those with no CKD or CKD stage 1-3 (P = 0.011).
The occurrence of a major glomerulus-infiltrating CD11b+F4/80-I-A- macrophage population exhibiting the markers programmed death ligand-1 (PD-L1), Mac-2, and macrophage mannose receptor (CD206) and producing Klf4, Il10, Retnla, Tnf, and Il6 mRNA, which are known to be expressed by alternatively activated (M2b) macrophages, correlated with proteinuria status.
The predominant and high expression of PD-L1 by CD11b+F4/80-I-A- glomerular macrophages in kidneys of mice with GN and the inhibition of proteinuria by anti-PD-L1 mAb supported the pathogenic role of these macrophages but not the PD-L1- PMN in GN development and in inducing podocyte damage.
In order to elucidate the steroidogenesis of clinically nonfunctioning adrenocortical adenoma, we studied the aldosterone, cortisol (F) and dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) content and the expression of mRNA of cytochrome P450 for side chain cleavage (P450scc), 17 alpha-hydroxylase (P450c17).
To understand the molecular mechanism by which OCT4 and GDF3 function in tumorigenesis as well as stemness, we investigated the transcriptional regulation of GDF3 mediated by OCT4 in human embryonic carcinoma (EC) NCCIT cells, which are pluripotent stem cells of TGCTs.
Comparative quantitative real-time PCR analysis of the expression of TGF@[beta] family factors in mouse embryonic stem, embryonic germ, and embryonic teratocarcinoma cells showed that embryonic teratocarcinoma cells express lower ActivinA than pluripotent stem cells but similar levels of factors Nodal, Lefty 1, TGFbeta1, BMP4, and GDF3.
In human nullipotent embryonic teratocarcinoma PA-1 cells, most factors of the TGFbeta family (ACTIVINA, NODAL, LEFTY 1, BMP4, and GDF3) are expressed at lower levels than in human embryonic stem cells: Thus, in mouse and human nullipotent teratocarcinoma cells, theexpression of ActivinA is significantly reduced com- pared ivith embryonic stem cells.
GDF3 is a TGFB family member associated with pluripotency and differentiation during embryonic development that has been previously reported to be re-expressed in a number of cancer types.
In this study we decipher the role of GDF3 in an in vitro model of cancer stem cells, NCCIT cells.
Our study implies that blocking of GDF3 combined with retinoic acid-treatment of solid cancers is a compelling direction for further investigations, which can lead to re-design of cancer differentiation therapies.
This study provides the first evidence that NANOG is a transcriptional activator of the expression of the oncogenic growth factor GDF3 in embryonic carcinoma cells.
Thus any change of the CHH/CHG methylation pattern is a minor event in tumorigenesis, even if the stem cell markers OCT4, NANOG, STELLAR and GDF3 are expressed like in the MCF7 breast cancer cell line.
The aim of this study is to investigate whether GDF3 is related to the progression of human breast cancer and the effects of GDF3 on breast cancer cells.
The expression of GDF3 in 24 breast cancer specimens paired with corresponding neighboring nontumorous tissue was studied by Western blot.
Breast cancer cells were treated with different concentrations of recombinant human GDF3 protein.
We found that GDF3 expression level was significantly down-regulated in breast cancer tissues compared to the surrounding nontumorous tissues.
Our data indicated that GDF3 expression is significantly decreased in human breast cancer tissues, and reconstitution of GDF3 in breast cancer may be a potential therapeutic approach to inhibit aggressive growth of breast cancer.
The TRPV4-axonal neuropathy spectrum is a group of disorders presenting as a predominantly motor axonal peripheral neuropathy, frequently in association with vocal cord paralysis, and occasionally accompanied by sensorineural hearing loss and bladder urgency and incontinence.
TRPV4 was also present in the endolymphatic sacs of patients with vestibular schwannoma and with Meniere's disease.
An IDO1 inhibitor, epacadostat also demonstrated promising activity in combination with the PD-1 checkpoint inhibitors in other solid tumors, including melanoma, urothelial carcinoma, renal cell carcinoma, and non-small cell lung cancer.
To explore the role of indoleamine-pyrrole 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO), an immunomodulatory enzyme, in renal cell carcinoma (RCC).
Some of salivary glycoproteins, such as Alfa-amylase, clusterin, haptoglobin, heavy and light chains of immunoglobulins, and transferrin, seem to be worthy of detailed glycosylation analysis in the detection of alcohol dependence.
The presentations were (1) Introduction, by Raye Litten; (2) Direct Ethanol Metabolites--On the Threshold From Science to Routine Use, by Friedrich M. Wurst; (3) Sialic Acid Index of Plasma Apolipoprotein J (SIJ) as a Viable Marker for Chronic Alcohol Consumption, by Philippe Marmillot; (4) The Emergence of Ethyl Glucuronide (EtG) Testing as a Tool in Monitoring Healthcare Professionals, by Gregory E. Skipper; (5) Application of Biomarkers for Alcohol Use Disorders in Clinical Practice, by Tim Neumann; (6) Utility of Biomarkers in Assessing the Efficacy of Medications for Treating Alcoholism, by Marty Javors; and (7) Discussion, by Raye Litten.
In contrast to CDG1, there was no decrease in clusterin or serum amyloid P in patients with alcoholism.
The PID-IFB controller is effective in improving time spent in range as well as reducing nocturnal hypoglycemia during the overnight period in children and adolescents with type 1 diabetes in a diabetes camp setting.
To examine for the possibility that CD59 becomes detached from cell surfaces following cell injury, this study evaluated renal excretion of CD59 in patients with idiopathic membranous glomerulonephritis (MGN; N = 21), diabetic nephropathy (DNP; N = 15) and in healthy control subjects (N = 13).
In normal kidneys and kidney specimens from the patients with minimal change nephrotic syndrome, membranous nephropathy, and IgA nephropathy, HRF20 was strongly localized in the peritubular capillaries and along Bowman's capsules.
We investigated Beta-defensin family expression in liver cancer in publicly available datasets and found that among all the Beta-defensins tested, only Beta-defensin 1 was significantly downregulated, suggesting Beta-defensin 1 plays a crucial role in liver cancer development.
Furthermore, the downregulation of Beta-defensin 1 and E-cadherin, and upregulation of hepatocyte growth factor-regulated tyrosine kinase substrate, were further confirmed in liver cancer and adjacent normal tissue collected from in-house Chinese liver cancer patients.
Together, our results suggest Beta-defensin 1 plays an important role in protecting HCV progression and liver cancer development.
mRNA expression of the AMPs Alfa defensin (HNP-1); cathelicidin (LL-37); and Beta defensins (hBD-1, hBD-2, hBD-3, hBD-4) in human uveal and cutaneous melanoma cell lines, primary human uveal melanocytes, and primary human uveal melanoma cells was determined by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction.
Small molecular inhibitors targeting the first bromodomain of BRD4 (BRD4-BD1) have showed promising potentials in the therapies of BRD4-related cancers.
The DEFB1 gene, which encodes human Beta-defensin-1 (HBD-1), contributes to innate immune responses and functions as a potential tumor suppressor in urological cancers.
Bromodomain-containing protein 4 (BRD4), a protein containing two BRDs termed BD1 and BD2, has emerged as an attractive candidate for the development of inhibitors targeting gene transcription in several types of cancers.
We discuss three hypothalamic mechanisms of fatigue in multiple sclerosis: (1) general hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis hyperactivity, (2) disordered orexin neurotransmission, (3) abnormal cortisol secretion.
Elevation levels of OX1R and OX2R following EAE induction suggest that alteration in orexinergic system may involve in pathogenesis of multiple sclerosis.
Narcolepsy with cataplexy is caused by a selective loss of hypocretin-producing neurons, but symptomatic narcolepsy can also result from hypothalamic and brainstem lesions caused by multiple sclerosis (MS).
Considering the multiplicity of symptoms associated with multiple sclerosis (MS), there is possibility that hypocretin system function might be involved in the pathogenesis of the disease.
The mass was then completely removed surgically using an NBI-assisted endoscopic technique, and a histopathological examination revealed it was a hemangiopericytoma-like (HPCL) tumor.
Nasal hemangiopericytoma-like (HPCL) tumor is a rare vascular tumor and should be differentiated from typical hemangiopericytomas (HPCs).
These studies have identified four gene variants associated with restless legs syndrome (BTBD9, MEIS1, MAP2K5/LBXCOR1, and PTPRD) and two variants associated with narcolepsy (one in the T-cell receptor Alfa locus and another between CPT1B and CHKB).
In this study, the effect of therapeutic hypervolemia, hemodilution, and hypertension (HHH-therapy) on cerebral blood flow (CBF) was assessed by xenon-enhanced computerized tomography (XeCT) hypothesizing an increase in CBF in poorly perfused regions.
Surgical outcomes were improved by the introduction of the operative microscope in the 1960s and perioperative care utilizing induced hypertension, hypovolemia, and hemodilution ("HHH therapy").
Hypertension, hypervolemia, and hemodilution [HHH] therapy is widely used for prophylactic and therapeutic means in the setting of angiographic or clinical cerebral vasospasm.
This work presents a yet unreported CNS involvement pattern, notably multiple supratentorial stroke-like lesions in association with HHH syndrome.
We suggest including HHH syndrome in the differential diagnosis of patients found to have stroke-like lesions on brain MRI.
The induction of hypertension as part of HHH therapy for SAH-related cerebral vasospasm may result in RLS.
Therapeutic treatment with hypertension, hypervolemia and hemodilution (HHH) has a direct influence on cerebral vasospasm, ischemic sequelae and outcome, while prophylactic HHH leads to excess complications.
The common therapeutic approach to patients, who develop vasospasm following subarachnoid hemorrhage, is usually composed of hypertension, hypervolemia, and hemodilution (HHH).
Elevated TCD velocities often initiate the use of triple-H (HHH: hypertension, hemodilution, and hypervolemia) therapy and subsequently guide it.
A significantly higher mRNA expression of CHST11, CHST12, and CHST15 was measured in ovarian cancer samples in comparison to non-malignant ones, and the same trend was observed for CHST13.
Here, we review the current evidence for mitochondrial dysfunction in neuronal models of seven LSD, including GM1-gangliosidosis, mucopolysaccharidosis IIIC, multiple sulfatase deficiency, Krabbe disease, Gaucher disease, Niemann Pick disease type C and the neural ceroid lipofuscinoses and outline current experimental therapies aimed at restoring mitochondrial function and neuroprotection in LSD.
Lysosomal storage disorder samples include; aspartylglucosaminuria, galactosialidosis, Gaucher disease, GM1 gangliosidosis, mucopolysaccharidosis types I, II, IIIC, IVA, VI, and VII, mucolipidosis type II, multiple sulfatase deficiency, and sialidosis type II.
There were 20 cases of metachromatic leukodystrophy (infantile,14; juvenile, 6), 12 cases of Tay-Sachs disease (infantile, 9; late G(M2-M3) gangliosidoses, 3), 8 cases of Sandhoff's disease, and 1 male case with multiple sulfatase deficiency.
The characteristic cytoplasmic inclusions were observed in the cultured cells of Fabry disease, Tay-Sachs disease, Sandhoff disease, generalized gangliosidosis, Niemann-Pick disease, metachromatic leukodystrophy, and multiple sulfatase deficiency, and differ in fine structure with these diseases.
Ultrastructurally, the cytoplasmic inclusions showed pleomorphic osmiophilic inclusions in Fabry disease, membranous cytoplasmic bodies (MCB) in Tay-Sachs disease and Sandhoff disease, MCB and vacuolar inclusions containing finely reticulogranular materials in generalized gangliosidosis, myelin-like inclusions in Niemann-Pick disease, concentric lamellar inclusions in metachromatic leukodystrophy, and polymorphic cytoplasmic inclusions in multiple sulfatase deficiency.
Real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction, in accordance with the microarray analysis, indicated that PEDF treatment caused an upregulation in the mRNA expression level of stanniocalcin 2, brain-specific angiogenesis inhibitor 2 and growth arrest, DNA-damage-inducible, alpha, and downregulation in the messenger ribonucleic acid level of fibroblast growth factor 3, teratocarcinoma-derived growth factor, neuropilin1, and endothelial Per/ARNT/Sim domain protein1, respectively.
PSK reduced SMO, MAML3 and RBPJ expression in pancreatic cancer cells under hypoxia.
These results suggest that PSK suppresses Hedgehog signaling through down-regulation of MAML3 and RBPJ transcription under hypoxia, inhibiting the induction of a malignant phenotype in pancreatic cancer.
Our results suggest that hypoxia promotes SMO transcription through upregulation of MAML3 and RBPJ to induce proliferation, invasiveness and tumorigenesis in pancreatic cancer.
A total of 75 anal lesions were retrieved from the files of the Department of Pathology of Barretos Cancer Hospital (Barretos, Brazil) in order to verify the human papillomavirus (HPV) statuses of these lesions and characterize the immunohistochemical expression levels of TOP2A and MCM2 in anal carcinoma, as these are important markers for cervical HPV-induced lesions; their expression was also compared with respect to p16 and Ki-67.
MCM2, TOP2A, p16 and Ki-67 exhibited intense positive staining in the anal lesions, indicating that these markers were significantly and constantly expressed in anal carcinoma.
Briefly, one cell proliferation marker, Ki-67 antigen (Ki-67), was upregulated in the cells with overexpressed GAS2, "Correlation between proliferation markers: PCNA, Ki-67, MCM-2 and antiapoptotic protein Bcl-2 in colorectal cancer" [1].
RTKN could affect the proliferation and metastasis of colon cancer by reducing expression of MCM2/3/5, CDK1/2 and PCNA, suggesting that RTKN was a potential target for treating colon cancer.
We found that the expression of MCM7 is an independent risk factor for RFS in patients with Dukes C colorectal cancer.
Further studies are required to investigate the validity of MCM7 protein expression for its potential clinical use in colorectal cancer therapy and prognosis.
In 120 untreated patients (age: 53.5 +/- 11.2 years) with essential hypertension and 60 healthy controls, we measured (a) LV longitudinal, circumferential and radial strain (S), peak torsion and the percentage changes between peak twisting and untwisting at the end of early diastolic filling (%dpTw-UtwEDF) using speckle tracking echocardiography and (b) serum levels of ACE and NTproBNP.
Plasma ADM, ANP and BNP concentrations were measured in 20 patients with AMH, 35 patients with essential hypertension (EH), and 40 healthy control subjects.
This study was designed to assess any changes in the plasma concentrations of adrenomedullin (ADM) and atrial and brain natriuretic peptide (ANP and BNP, respectively), and to investigate their pathophysiological roles in patients with essential hypertension (EH).
Previously we demonstrated that a single intravenous injection of the myocardium-tropic adeno-associated virus (AAV) 9-based vector encoding for proBNP prevented the development of hypertensive heart disease (HHD) in spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHRs).
The current study was designed to determine the duration of cardiac transduction after a single AAV9 injection and to determine whether cardiac BNP overexpression can delay the progression of previously established HHD, and improve survival in aged SHRs with overt HHD.
In aged SHRs (9-months of age), echocardiographic studies demonstrated progression of HHD in untreated controls, while AAV9-BNP vector treatment arrested the deterioration of cardiac function at six months post-injection (15-months of age).
AAV9 induced cardiac BNP overexpression prevented development of congestive heart failure, and significantly prolonged the survival of aged SHRs with previously established overt HHD.
These findings support the beneficial effects of chronic supplementation of BNP in a frequent and highly morbid condition such as HHD.
We measured urinary excretion of AQP2 and ENaC Beta-subunit corrected for creatinine (u-AQP2(CR), u-ENaC(Beta-CR)), prostaglandin E2 (u-PGE2) and cyclic AMP (u-cAMP), fractional sodium excretion (FE(Na)), free water clearance (C(H2O)), as well as plasma concentrations of vasopressin (AVP), renin (PRC), angiotensin II (Ang II), aldosterone (Aldo), and atrial and brain natriuretic peptide (ANP, BNP) in 21 patients with essential hypertension and 20 normotensive controls during 24-h urine collection (baseline), and after hypertonic saline infusion on a 4-day high sodium (HS) diet (300 mmol sodium/day) and a 4-day low sodium (LS) diet (30 mmol sodium/day).
SIRs of cancers having temporal overlap with the active phase of myositis [cancers concurrent with active myositis (CAM), n = 30] and cancers not having such temporal overlap [cancers non-concurrent with active myositis (CNM), n = 22] were compared in 281 patients.
When stratified by myositis-cancer intervals, CAM SIR was 9.94 (6.43, 14.67) within 1 year of myositis diagnosis, whereas no temporal relationship was found for CNM.
The cancer stage at the time of diagnosis was more advanced in CAM than CNM (P &lt; 0.001), with a correspondingly increased hazard ratio of mortality [4.3 (1.5, 12.7)] in patients with CAM vs CNM.
Multiple types of cancers showed elevated SIRs among CAM, but none among CNM.
We analyzed 15 conventional melanomas (CMs), 3 melanomas arising in congenital nevi (CNMs), and 5 spitzoid melanomas (SMs), using various platforms, including whole genome or exome sequencing, the molecular inversion probe assay, and/or targeted sequencing.
In the present study, we aimed to investigate the role of myotubularin-related phosphatase 3 (MTMR3) in CRC cell growth via lentivirus-mediated small interfering RNA (siRNA) transduction in human colon cancer cell lines HCT116 and SW1116.
Type I CMN is the most common, usually, if not always, a single lesion, it consists of a plaque that involves only 1 anatomic region and does not go beyond it; type I CNM grows in proportion to the growth of the child, melanoma rarely develops from it, and when it does it usually arises at the dermoepidermal junction.
Tamoxifen (Tmf), is a standard of care for women with estrogen receptor positive (ER+) breast cancer.
In the group of breast cancer patients (P T0-2N0-1M0) who received adjuvant polychemotherapy (TMF, CMF schemes) the survival rates are higher by 12.0%-16.6% than in the control group during the sixth, seventh, and eighth years of the follow-up.
The study included myopic and hyperopic eyes with preoperative best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) = 1 (20/20), of the total number of 322 divided into 2 groups--1) myopic eyes (n = 241) which were divided into 4 subgroups according to the myopia strength: a) &lt; or = -1.75 D (n = 23), b) from -2 to -3.75 D (n = 81), c) from -4 to -6.75 D (n = 113), d) &gt; or = -7 D (n = 24); 2) hyperopic eyes (n = 81) which were divided into 3 subgroups according to the hyperopia strength: a) &lt; or = +1.75D (n = 10), b) from +2 to +3.75 D (n = 46), c) &gt; or = +4 D (n = 25).
However a very significant difference was found according to histotype: five year disease specific survival was 84% (CI 66-93) for the well- differentiated and only 35% (CI 20-51) for the dedifferentiated liposarcoma (p &lt; 0.0001).
FDG-PET/CT had a sensitivity of 100% (95% CI 63-100) and specificity of 100% (95% CI 20-100) for the detection of recurrent uterine leiomyosarcomas.
The NGF (angiogenesis) and VEGF-C (lymphangiogenesis) might play a crucial role in the pathogenesis of psoriasis vulgaris and could be researched further as potential new targeted therapies for psoriasis vulgaris.
Taken together, these findings suggested that crmp2 is a target of miR-181c and that the abnormally low expression of miR-181c in the hippocampus of SAMP8 mice could lead to an increase of the crmp2 protein level in AD mice, which might potentially play a role in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease.
The E3 ubiquitin ligase synoviolin (SYVN1) functions as an anti-apoptotic factor that is responsible for the outgrowth of synovial cells during the development of rheumatoid arthritis.
Here, we report that elevated SYVN1 expression correlates with decreased levels of the protein inositol-requiring enzyme 1 (IRE1)-a pro-apoptotic factor in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-stress-induced apoptosis pathway-in synovial fibroblasts from mice with collagen-induced arthritis (CIA).
Higher levels of insulin and glucose, lower levels of HDL, higher levels of TC/HDL and HOMA values, and different levels of some hormones were noted only in the women with abdominal, and not general obesity.
Abdominal obesity is associated with insulin resistance and with higher risks of metabolic syndrome and cardiovascular diseases, whereas general obesity is not.
The present study aims at examining the effects of argan oil on the three main cardiovascular risk factors associated with metabolic syndrome (hypertension, insulin resistance and obesity) and on one of its main complications, neuropathic pain.
A total of 97 IDDs subjects including 51 MS and 46 neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder (NMOSD) patients, and 34 healthy controls (HCs) were tested for the detection of IgG, IgM and IgA against mycobacterial antigens by indirect ELISA.
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and serum sCD40L levels were measured in 29 multiple sclerosis (MS), 29 neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder (NMOSD), and 27 disease control (DC) patients.
Viral hepatitis markers, anti-HIV, toxoplasma-IgM, CMV-IgM, rubella-IgM, EBV-VCA-IgM, VDRL, Brucella tube agglutination, echinococcus antibody, autoantibody tests and neuromyelitis optica test were negative.
This study was undertaken to investigate the association of aldosterone synthase C-344T, angiotensin II type I receptor A1166C and 11- hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2 G534A polymorphisms with essential hypertension in the population of Odisha, India.
The expression of PG-M1, the most specific histiocytic marker, has not yet been studied in granuloma annulare (GA) and other palisaded granulomas of the skin.
Because opioid peptides might be of importance in inflammatory skin diseases, for example psoriasis, sections of skin from psoriatic patients were immunohistochemically stained with antisera against methionine and leucine enkephalin, CD68 (KP1, PG-M1), calprotectin (M747), M130 (Ber-MAC3), CD1a and CD3.
The resting plasma PGF2 alpha in ten 'aspirin-sensitive' urticaria patients (24.89 +/- 2.79 pg m-1) was significantly higher than the levels in ten normal subjects (6.75 +/- 1.1 pg ml-1) (P less than 0.01).
However, combining previously published data from various authors with our own, significant associations between this skin disease and genetic polymorphisms such as MN, Gc, Gm (2), red cell acid phosphatase, and red cell phosphoglucomutase (PGM1) were seen.
In 239 German patients with atopic conditions (atopic dermatitis, hay fever, allergic rhinitis, bronchial asthma, and acute urticaria) the phenotype and gene distribution of 15 genetic blood polymorphisms (ABO, MNSs, rhesus, P, Kell, Duffy, Kidd, Hp, Gc, Gm, Inv, aP, PGM1, EsD, and 6-PGD) were analyzed and compared with those in 151 selected controls (individuals clinically free of allergic conditions and without allergy in the family history).
To examine the relationship between HLA-DRB1 alleles and the clinical expression of the secondary form of Sjogren's syndrome (SS) in patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
Our identification and independent replication of variants in KCNK3, a gene implicated in primary hyperaldosteronism, as well as a variant in HOTTIP (HOXA-EVX1) suggest that further work to clarify the roles of these genes may be warranted.
The role of the two-pore domain K+ (K2P) channel TASK-1 (KCNK3) in lung cancer is at present unknown.
We found that TASK-1 is expressed in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines at variable levels.
In a highly TASK-1 expressing NSCLC cell line, A549, a characteristic pH- and hypoxia-sensitive non-inactivating K+ current was measured, indicating the presence of functional TASK-1 channels.
In contrast to TASK-1, which was not differentially expressed in lung cancer vs. normal lung tissue, we found the Na+-coupled nutrient transporters, SLC5A3, SLC5A6, and SLC38A1, transporters for myo-inositol, biotin and glutamine, respectively, to be significantly overexpressed in lung adenocarcinomas.
In summary, we show for the first time that the TASK-1 channel regulates apoptosis and proliferation in a subset of NSCLC.
Three potassium channels have been associated with primary aldosteronism (PA) in rodents and humans: KCNK3 (TASK-1), KCNK9 (TASK-3), and KCNJ5 (Kir3.4).
In the experiments here, the small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) targeted against TASK-1, an acid-sensitive member of two-pore domain K(+) (K2P) channel family, were transfected into mouse neuroblastoma N2A cells.
In the present study, the expressions of two members of acid-sensitive TASK channels, TASK-1 and TASK-2, were detected in mouse neuroblastoma N2A cells by RT-PCR.
Background Inherited deficiency of all vitamin K-dependent coagulant factors (VKCFD) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder caused by mutations in the Gamma-glutamyl carboxylase gene (GGCX) or the vitamin K epoxide reductase gene (VKORC1), with great heterogeneity in terms of both clinical presentation and response to treatment.
Biochemical and molecular studies identify two variants of this autosomal recessive disorder: VKCFD1, which is associated with point mutations in the gamma-glutamylcarboxylase gene (GGCX), and VKCFD2, which results from point mutations in the vitamin K epoxide reductase gene (VKOR).
PXE-like clinical findings have been encountered in association with vitamin K-dependent coagulation factor deficiency, an autosomal recessive disorder that is due to mutations in either the GGCX or VKORC1 genes.
However, the function and mechanism of KLF2 in colorectal cancer (CRC) is still unknown.
To determine whether altered levels of apolipoprotein(a) [apo(a)], the plasminogenlike glycoprotein of the potentially atherogenic lipoprotein(a); contribute to the increased risk of atherosclerosis, apo(a) levels were measured in 107 patients with IDDM and compared with nondiabetic control subjects and male elective coronary artery graft patients.
Screening for MYOC mutations was performed in 207 index patients: 96 with adult-onset primary open-angle glaucoma (POAG), 21 with primary congenital glaucoma (PCG), 18 with juvenile-onset open-angle glaucoma (JOAG), five with Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome (ARS), and 67 with other types of glaucoma.
Immunohistochemistry was performed on 328 samples consisting of 256 clear cell/conventional, 27 papillary, 28 chromophobe, five collecting duct, five unclassified RCCs and seven renal oncocytomas using antibodies MOC31, BerEP4 and antibodies against cytokeratins (KL-1, CAM5.2, 34betaE12, cytokeratin 7), RCC Ma, epithelial membrane antigen, E-cadherin, CD10, CD15 and vimentin.
Peripheral cell accentuation reactivity for cytokeratin KL1 was observed in 66% of the chromophobe cell carcinoma cases, and apical cytoplasmic positivity was observed in 37% of the renal oncocytoma cases (P = .01).
EMT was involved in the pathological process of diabetic pulmonary fibrosis, which was activated by LOX-1/TGF-Beta1/KLF6 signaling pathway.
Lung lesion classifications were catarrhal-purulent bronchopneumonia (CPBP), pleuropneumonia (PLP) and pleuritis.
No respiratory failure occurred in group A; two patients experienced slow weaning from ventilation assistance and one died from that complication in group B. Myocardial revascularization without CPBP allows a better postoperative clinical course in patients with advanced pulmonary disease.
Immunoexpression of galectin-1, galectin-3, galectin-7, and galectin-9 was semiquantitatively analyzed in 65 cases of actinic cheilitis graded as low risk (n = 40) or high risk (n = 25) of malignant transformation.
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) affects 75 to 100% of the patients undergoing bariatric surgery (BSx), with non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) being present in 24 to 98% of the patients.
Bariatric surgery (BSx) is an approved therapeutic alternative for class II-III obesity, but little evidence focuses on older adults.
We carried out a population-based, observational study from 1990-2009, of 40 consecutive elderly (age &gt;=60 years) residents of Olmsted County, MN, USA, with class II-III obesity treated with BSx at a University-based, academic health center.
Prevalence 1 year after BSx decreased for diabetes (57.5% to 22.5%; P &lt; 0.03), hypertension 87.5% to 73.7% (P = 0.003), dyslipidemia (80% to 42.5%; P &lt; 0.001) and sleep apnea (62.5% to 23.7%; P &lt; 0.001).MetS prevalence decreased from 80% to 45% (P &lt; 0.002).
Accounting for the costs and risks associated with BSx, providing state and federal resources for lifestyle behavior change programs could provide a key opportunity for the war against obesity.
We assessed the effects of bariatric surgery (BSx) compared to non-operative treatment for morbid obesity on overall quality of life (QoL), functional capacity, and symptoms in 13 HF patients undergoing BSx and six HF patients treated without surgery.
At baseline, BSx subjects had a greater body mass index and greater prevalence of diabetes and depression.
BSx subjects perceived obesity as a greater risk to their overall health than the surgical risk.
Those without a measurable decrease in CV risk had a greater tendency to perceive the risk of BSx as greater than that of obesity.
Obese subjects undergoing BSx are more likely than MM subjects to perceive obesity as a greater risk to their health than BSx.
We collected functional magnetic resonance imaging data on 60 individuals of equivalent age and gender in each of three groups--20 BDD, 20 weight-restored AN, and 20 healthy controls (HC)--while they viewed images of others' faces that contained only high or low spatial frequency information (HSF or LSF).
The BDD group demonstrated increased functional connectivity compared to HC between left anterior occipital face area and right fusiform face area (FFA) for LSF faces, which was associated with symptom severity.
Both BDD and AN groups had increased connectivity compared to HC between FFA and precuneous/posterior cingulate gyrus for LSF faces, and decreased connectivity between FFA and insula.
The BDD group showed lower activity in the parahippocampal gyrus, lingual gyrus and precuneus for LSF images.
Lymphoproliferative syndrome, production of anti-dsDNA Abs, lupus nephritis, and accumulation of CD3(+)B220(+)CD4(-)CD8(-) autoreactive T cells (in the peripheral blood and the spleen) were significantly increased in B6-MRL Fas lpr/j RAGE(-/-) mice compared with B6-MRL Fas lpr/j mice (respectively p &lt; 0.005, p &lt; 0.05, p &lt; 0.001, and p &lt; 0.001).
It is suggested that, in essential hypertension, an increased cellular Ca2+ load or an enhanced external Ca2+ entry stimulate the NHE-1 through protein kinase/phosphatase and Ca2+/calmodulin systems, thereby increasing its activity.
In 15 patients with essential hypertension, 16 patients with renal hypertension and in 12 healthy subjects Ca2+ ATPase activity was determined in red blood cells both in the basal state and after maximal stimulation with calmodulin.
Therefore, the aim of the present study was to evaluate basal and calmodulin-activated Ca(2+)-ATPase in red blood cells and its relationship to the insulin response during an intravenous glucose tolerance test in 27 normotensive adolescents with a family history of essential hypertension (F+) (mean age, 13.9 +/- 0.5 years) and in 10 control subjects matched for age and body mass index with no family history of hypertension (F-).
Remarkably, pathogenic or likely pathogenic alleles in DNA repair/genomic instability genes (other than BRCA2, ATM and PALB2) accounted for at least 16.8, 11.1, 50 and 45.5% of mutation-positive breast, ovarian, thyroid and colorectal cancer patients, respectively.
Results Thirty-three (3.9%; 95% CI, 3.0% to 5.8%) of 854 patients with pancreatic cancer had a deleterious germline mutation, 31 (3.5%) of which affected known familial pancreatic cancer susceptibility genes: BRCA2 (12 patients), ATM (10 patients), BRCA1 (3 patients), PALB2 (2 patients), MLH1 (2 patients), CDKN2A (1 patient), and TP53 (1 patient).
To evaluate the potential involvement of host lipoproteins and sPLA(2)s in malaria, we investigated the interactions between bee venom phospholipase A(2) (bvPLA(2)), human triglyceride-rich lipoproteins, and infected erythrocytes.
We demonstrate that HIPK1 is expressed in both androgen-dependent and androgen-independent prostate cancer (PCa) cells, whereas CLK2 and PAGE4 are expressed only in androgen-dependent cells.
Emerging data point to the role of HIPK1 in cancer, but it is still not clear whether it acts as a tumor suppressor or promoter.
Here we identified HIPK1 as a kinase that is significantly overexpressed in colorectal cancer (CRC) and whose expression is stage-dependent.
This study investigated the incidence and clinical significance of homeodomain-interacting protein kinase 1 expression in breast cancer patients.
Non-cancerous breast tissue, pTis and pT1mic lesions did not show homeodomain-interacting protein kinase 1 expression at any sites.
Homeodomain-interacting protein kinase  1 expression was identified only in invasive breast cancer cells with three different patterns: cytoplasmic, nuclear, and both cytoplasmic and nuclear.
Quantitative PCR (qPCR) and antibody detection demonstrated that the mucus composition of pigs with swine dysentery was characterized by de novo expression of MUC5AC and increased expression of MUC2 in the colon.
WNT signaling-targeted therapeutics, such as anti-FZD1/2/5/7/8 monoclonal antibody (mAb) (vantictumab), anti-LGR5 antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) (mAb-mc-vc-PAB-MMAE), anti-PTK7 ADC (PF-06647020), anti-ROR1 mAb (cirmtuzumab), anti-RSPO3 mAb (rosmantuzumab), small-molecule porcupine inhibitors (ETC-159, WNT-C59 and WNT974), tankyrase inhibitors (AZ1366, G007-LK, NVP-TNKS656 and XAV939) and Beta-catenin inhibitors (BC2059, CWP232228, ICG-001 and PRI-724), are in clinical trials or preclinical studies for the treatment of patients with WNT-driven cancers.
Using a multivariate regression model, ADHD combined presentation [combined versus predominantly hyperactive/impulsive and unspecified OR 4.52 (1.23-16.55), p = 0.023], age [OR 1.46 (1.14-1.88), p = 0.003], ODD/CD [OR 5.53 (2.19-14.01), p &lt; 0.001], DCD [OR 4.22 (1.70-10.48), p = 0.002], PRI [OR 0.97 (0.94-0.99), p = 0.01] were significantly associated with recommendation of methylphenidate treatment.
Bullying victimization and perpetration in children with ADHD having a low PRI and low executive function should be routinely surveyed.
The present study evaluates the use of curcumin (CC) and primaquine (PRI) as an anti-malarial combination, packaged within niosomes, in comparison to their respective monotherapy options.
It was observed that in Plasmodium berghei-infected mice, mice treated with a combination of 35 mg/kg of CC along with either 5 mg/kg or 1 mg/kg body weight of PRI demonstrated 100% anti-malarial activity and survivability beyond 20 days.
The findings of the study suggest that niosome-based PRI-CC combination therapy may be a promising approach in the treatment of malaria.
The aim of this study was to assess the safety, tolerability, and anti-fibrotic effect of PRI-724, a small-molecule modulator of Wnt signaling, in patients with HCV cirrhosis.
In this single-center, open-label, phase 1 trial, we sequentially enrolled patients with HCV cirrhosis who were classified as Child-Pugh (CP) class A or B. PRI-724 was administered as a continuous intravenous infusion of 10, 40, or 160mg/m2/day for six cycles of 1week on and 1week off.
The secondary endpoint was efficacy of PRI-724 in treating cirrhosis based on CP score and liver biopsy.
This study showed that administration of 10 or 40mg/m2/day intravenous PRI-724 over 12weeks was well-tolerated by patients with HCV cirrhosis; however, liver injury as a possible related serious adverse event was observed in the 160mg/m2/day cohort.
With regard to chiral inversion enzymes, adjuvant-induced arthritis decreased the messenger RNA levels of acyl-coenzyme A synthetase (ACS) isoforms, but not 2-arylpropionyl-CoA epimerase, compared with control rats.
administration at 20 mg/kg of body weight, but not 2 mg/kg, to male DBA/1J mice every 2 days for 12 days led to a marked decrease in type II collagen-induced arthritis by 45% (P &lt; 0.05).
1 but not 2 suppressed the chronic inflammation in the arthritis model but neither compound was active in the acute inflammation assay.
Exposure to bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)-4 was found to enhance a TrkAhigh/CD15-/CD184- neuroblastoma cellular subset, accompanied by a reduction in doublecortin-positive neuroblasts and of NMYC protein expression in SH-SY5Y cells.
Recent studies indicate that C-X-C motif chemokine receptor 4 (CXCR4) and its ligand, C-X-C motif chemokine ligand 12 (CXCL12), stimulate expression of the cell cycle regulatory protein Cyclin D1 in neurofibromatosis 1-associated malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor (MPNST) cells and promote their proliferation.
Recent studies have independently implicated the chemokine CXCL12 and its receptors, CXCR4 and CXCR7, in the pathophysiology of Kaposi sarcoma (KS).
Western blot analysis revealed the expression of multiple CXCR4 isoforms in neuroblastoma cells.
Our data suggest a modulatory role of the MSC secretome on the expression of the 47 kDa CXCR4 isoform and invasion potential of the neuroblastoma cells to the bone marrow.
Finally, we identified seven MS indel driver hotspots: four in known cancer genes (ACVR2A, RNF43, JAK1, and MSH3) and three in genes not previously implicated as cancer drivers (ESRP1, PRDM2, and DOCK3).
In conclusion, our results supported that miR-512-3p could inhibit tumor cell adhesion, migration, and invasion by regulating the RAC1 activity via DOCK3 in NSCLC A549 and H1299 cell lines.
Elongated mesenchymal migration of cancer cells is driven by Rac1 activation mediated by the adaptor NEDD9 and the exchange factor DOCK3.
NEDD9 interacts with the guanine nucleotide exchange factor DOCK3 to promote Rac activation and the elongated, mesenchymal-type of tumour cell invasion, but the molecular mechanisms through which NEDD9 promotes melanoma metastasis are not fully understood.
We show that mesenchymal-type movement in melanoma cells is driven by activation of the GTPase Rac through a complex containing NEDD9, a recently identified melanoma metastasis gene, and DOCK3, a Rac guanine nucleotide exchange factor.
identify DOCK3, NEDD9, WAVE2, and ARHGAP22 as key molecules regulating Rac and Rho signaling that determine the mode of movement driving melanoma cell metastasis.
Mechanisms, some involving established cancer-related signaling/transcription factor pathways (for example, Wnt, TGF-Beta, mir200, ZEB1, OVOL2, p63 and p300) and translational implications of the Grainyhead proteins in cancer are discussed in this review article.
In the present study, we demonstrated that OVOL2, a zinc finger transcription factor, inhibits TGF-Beta signaling-induced EMT in mouse and human mammary tumor cells, as well as in mouse tumor models.
Data from the Oncomine databases indicated a strong negative relationship between OVOL2 expression and breast cancer progression.
The modulation of these molecular processes may represent a strategy for inhibiting breast cancer invasion by restoring OVOL2 expression.
We previously reported that human OVOL1 and OVOL2 were preferentially expressed in the normal epidermis and hair follicles as well as their tumors, and found that OVOL1 is upregulated in Bowen's disease and downregulated in cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma.
The aims of this study were to elucidate the potential role of the OVOL1-OVOL2 axis in Bowen's disease and squamous cell carcinoma, and to reveal the relationship between OVOL and c-Myc, a proto-oncogene that plays a pivotal role in the malignancy of epithelial tumors.
OVOL2 was markedly upregulated in the nucleus of Bowen's disease cells, but the distribution of OVOL2 expression in squamous cell carcinoma varied widely; OVOL2 was typically expressed in the cytoplasm, but only sporadically in the nucleus.
These results suggest that OVOL1 is an upstream suppressor of c-Myc and OVOL2, and the OVOL1-OVOL2 axis is a modulator of c-Myc, coordinately regulating the invasiveness of cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma.
Taken together, this study suggests that the OVOL1-OVOL2 axis is a key modulator of c-Myc expression in the shift from in situ epidermal malignancy (Bowen's disease) to invasive squamous cell carcinoma.
In order to obtain some essential evidences for a potential targeted therapy in lung adenocarcinoma, the effects of Ovol2 gene on Epithelial-to-Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) was observed and the probable mechanisms were analyzed.
Ovol2 expression was previously evaluated by immunochemistry in lung adenocarcinoma tissue, and Ovol2 was overexpressed by lentivirus infection in A549 cells.
Downregulated Ovol2 expression is involved in the invasion and metastasis of breast and prostate cancers, but little is known about its expression and prognostic value in other cancers, including hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
Ovol2 expression was significantly lower in HCC tissues than in adjacent noncancerous tissues.
OVOL2 was also expressed in pilomatricoma, with only partial expression of OVOL1.
These results indicated that the OVOL1-OVOL2 axis may actively contribute to cell differentiation and proliferation in the hair bulb, suggesting that the OVOL1 and OVOL2 may be therapeutic targets of hair disorders, including alopecia, and play important roles in the tumorigenesis of pilomatricoma.
We studied the expression and function of OVOL2, a member of the Ovo family of conserved zinc-finger transcription factors regulated by the WNT signaling pathway, in intestinal tumors of mice and human beings.
Analysis of data from patients indicated that the levels of OVOL2 messenger RNA were significantly lower in colon carcinomas than adenomas, and decreased significantly as carcinomas progressed from grades 2 to 4.
Disruption of Ovol2 in Apc(min/+) mice increased WNT activity in intestinal tissues and the formation of invasive intestinal tumors.
Furthermore, forced expression of the repressor isoform of Ovol2 is able to reprogram metastatic breast cancer cells from a mesenchymal to an epithelial state.
Here, we found that PCBP4-deficient mice are prone to lung adenocarcinoma, lymphoma, and kidney tumor and that PCBP4-deficient mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEFs) exhibit enhanced cell proliferation but decreased cellular senescence.
PCBP4 plays important roles in the induction of cisplatin resistance in human maxillary cancers.
PCBP4 is a novel molecular target for the therapy of head and neck cancers, especially cisplatin-resistant cancers.
The protein alpha CP-4 (also known as hnRNP E4) is an RNA binding protein encoded by a gene at 3p21, one of the most common altered regions in lung cancer.
The aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of alpha CP-4 on the tumorigenic capacity of lung cancer cells.
Induction of alpha CP-4 expression caused cell cycle arrest in G(2)/M in 3 out of the 7 lung cancer cell lines studied, while no effect on apoptosis was observed.
In conclusion, expression of alpha CP-4 can inhibit proliferation and tumorigenesis of lung cancer cells, both in vivo and in vitro, by delaying the progression of the cell cycle.
alpha CP-4 is an RNA-binding protein coded by PCBP4, a gene mapped to 3p21, a common deleted region in lung cancer.
In this study we characterized the expression of alpha CP-4 and alpha CP-4a, an alternatively spliced variant of alpha CP-4, in lung cancer cell lines and non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) samples from early stage lung cancer patients.
In NSCLC biopsies, an immunocytochemical analysis showed cytoplasmic expression of alpha CP-4 and alpha CP-4a in normal lung bronchiolar epithelium.
In contrast, alpha CP-4 immunoreactivity was not found in 47% adenocarcinomas and 83% squamous cell carcinomas, whereas all of the tumors expressed alpha CP-4a.
By fluorescence in situ hybridization, &gt;30% of NSCLC cell lines and tumors showed allelic losses at PCBP4, correlating with the absence of the protein.
By Northern blotting and real-time reverse transcription-PCR, we detected the expression of alpha CP-4 and alpha CP-4a messages in NSCLC and small cell lung cancer cell lines.
Our data demonstrate an abnormal expression of alpha CP-4 in lung cancer, possibly associated with an altered processing of the alpha CP-4 mRNA leading to a predominant expression of alpha CP-4a.
Many pediatric patients, particularly those with short bowel syndrome or intestinal failure, will eventually require home PN (HPN) therapy.
The CD80/CD86-CD28 axis is a critical pathway for immuno-corrective therapy, and the cytotoxic T lymphocyte antigen 4 (CTLA4) is a promising immunosuppressor targeting the CD80/CD86-CD28 axis; however, its use for asthma therapy needs further optimization.
We assessed the roles of these inputs in DC10 reversal of OVA-associated asthma-like disease by treating affected mice with OVA-pulsed DC10 generated from wild-type or IL-10-sufficient MHCII(-/-) or CD80/CD86(-/-) mice, or with MHCII-intact IL-10-silenced DC10.
MHCII(-/-) DC10 expressed normal levels of IL-10, but, nevertheless, were unable to induce allergen tolerance in asthma phenotype mice, while tolerance induced by CD80/CD86(-/-) DC10 was attenuated but not eliminated.
To further clarify the endocrine activities of GHS, in 9 obese patients, 9 patients with Cushing's disease and 14 controls we studied the ACTH, F, GH and PRL responses to hexarelin (HEX, 2.0 micrograms/kg i.v.
Patients with Cushing's disease are known to have high ACTH/cortisol responses to desmopressin (DDAVP, a vasopressin analogue) and to hexarelin (HEX, a synthetic GH-releasing peptide).
The ACTH and cortisol responses to Hexarelin (HEX), a peptidyl GHS, are abolished by low-dose dexamethasone pretreatment in normal subjects but are exaggerated and higher than those after hCRH in patients with pituitary ACTH-dependent Cushing's disease, in spite of their hypercortisolism.
The endocrine responses (mean +/- SEM) to HEX alone were also studied in 8 patients with Addison's disease (AD, 6 males, 2 females, age 30-77 years; last hydrocortisone administration the day before testing).
In conclusion, our present data demonstrate that the ACTH-releasing activity of HEX is increased in primary hypoadrenalism as well as in normal subjects after metyrapone but not after RU-486 pretreatment.
Interestingly, the stimulatory effect of HEX on ACTH and cortisol release is exaggerated and higher than that of hCRH in patients with Cushing's disease (CD).
We previously reported that in Cushing's disease (CD) the ACTH- and cortisol (F)-releasing activity of Hexarelin (HEX), a GH secretagogue, is exaggerated with respect to that in normal subjects and is higher than that of human CRH (hCRH), but it is absent in Cushing's syndrome.
In conclusion, our findings demonstrate that the ACTH and F hyperresponsiveness to HEX is present in Cushing's disease with micro-, but not macro- ACTH-secreting pituitary adenoma.
To investigate the mechanism underlying the ACTH- and cortisol-releasing activity of GHRPs in man, we compared the ACTH- and cortisol-releasing activity of Hexarelin (HEX; 2.0 micrograms/kg, iv), a hexapeptide belonging to the GHRP family, with that of human CRH (hCRH; 2.0 micrograms/kg, iv) in normal subjects (6 men and 6 women, 24-68 yr old) and patients with Cushing's syndrome (2 men and 15 women, 16-68 yr old).
The stimulatory effect of HEX, but not that of hCRH, on both ACTH and cortisol secretion in Cushing's disease was clearly higher (P &lt; 0.01) than that observed in normal subjects.
In fact, in Cushing's disease both HEX and hCRH elicited a clear increase in ACTH levels [381.1 +/- 350.0 vs. 52.4 +/- 25.0 (P &lt; 0.005) and 100.0 +/- 86.2 vs. 53.3 +/- 29.7 pg/mL (P &lt; 0.01), respectively but the ACTH increase induced by HEX was about 7-fold greater (P &lt; 0.02) than that induced by hCRH.
In patients with Cushing's syndrome due to adrenal adenoma or ectopic ACTH, no change in ACTH and cortisol levels was observed after either HEX or hCRH administration.
In conclusion, the ACTH- and cortisol-releasing activity of HEX is similar to that of hCRH in normal subjects, whereas it is dramatically enhanced in patients with Cushing's disease.
As the stimulatory effect of HEX on ACTH and cortisol secretion is lost in patients with Cushing's syndrome due to adrenal adenoma or ectopic ACTH, these findings suggest the usefulness of GHRPs to investigate the activity of the hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal axis in pathophysiological conditions and possibly to differentiate pituitary from ectopic ACTH-dependent Cushing's syndrome.
Thus, the aim of this study was to detect FOXL1 expression in breast cancer and to analyze its role in the progression of breast cancer.
Our results demonstrated that FOXL1 expression at both the mRNA and protein levels was downregulated in breast cancer tissues and cell lines.
Ectopic FOXL1 suppressed breast cancer cell proliferation, migration, and invasion in vitro.
Taken together, the present study demonstrated that FOXL1 inhibited the proliferation, invasion, and migration of breast cancer in vitro and breast tumor growth in vivo through deactivating the Wnt/Beta-catenin signaling pathway.
Thus, these findings suggest that FOXL1 may be a potential novel target for breast cancer therapy.
Prolidase deficiency is a rare autosomal recessive disorder characterized by recurrent and nonhealing skin ulcers along with facial dysmorphism and mental retardation.
Prolidase deficiency is a rare autosomal recessive disease, in which pulmonary manifestations have been sporadically reported.
Prolidase deficiency is an autosomal recessive disorder, which is associated with chronic skin ulcers, a characteristic facial appearance, mental retardation, and recurrent infections.
The association of moderate to severe eczema and elevated plasma levels of immunoglobulin E is a characteristic not only of atopic dermatitis but also of various genodermatoses: hyperimmunoglobulin E syndromes, Omenn syndrome, Netherton syndrome, peeling skin syndrome type B, severe dermatitis, multiple allergies, and metabolic wasting syndrome, Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, prolidase deficiency, Loeys-Dietz syndrome, IPEX syndrome, STAT5B deficiency, and pentasomy X.
Prolidase deficiency (PD) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder that has symptoms such as skin ulcers, characteristic facies, mental retardation, skeletal deformities, hematological anomalies, splenomegaly, and chronic infections.
Mutations in PEPD gene cause, in human, prolidase deficiency (PD), a rare autosomal recessive disorder.
Xaa-Pro dipeptidase (XPD; prolidase; EC 3.4.13.9) specifically hydrolyzes dipeptides with a prolyl residue at the carboxy-terminus.
Prolidase deficiency is a rare autosomal recessive disease in which one of the last steps of collagen metabolism, cleavage of proline-containing dipeptides, is impaired.
Prolidase deficiency (PD) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder which may have a wide spectrum of clinical features.
Prolidase deficiency (PD), a rare autosomal recessive disorder in which mutations in the PEPD gene affect prolidase functionality, tends to have serious and sometimes life-threatening clinical symptoms.
The objective of this study was to determine whether diabetes mellitus (DM)-induced up-regulation of 14-3-3Beta (YWHAB) in endothelial cells enhances intimal hyperplasia in carotid artery-injured DM Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats.
Objective: To investigate expression, clinical, pathologic and prognostic significances of G-protein-coupled receptor kinase 3 (GRK3) in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
We have reported that G protein-coupled receptor kinase 3 (GRK3, also called ADRBK2) promotes prostate cancer progression.
We show GRK3 expression is higher in NEPC than in PAC cells and mouse models, and it positively correlates with the expression and activity of CREB in human prostate cancers.
Taken together, these results indicate that GRK3 is a new critical activator of NE phenotypes and mediator of CREB activation in promoting NED of prostate cancer cells.
Using established human breast cancer cell lines and an immunocompetent in vivo mouse model, we further demonstrate that alterations in GRK3 expression levels in tumor cells directly affect migration and invasion in vitro and the establishment of distant metastasis in vivo.
Furthermore, GRK3 was found to be overexpressed in human prostate cancers, especially in metastatic tumors.
Taken together, these data suggest that GRK3 plays an important role in prostate cancer progression and metastasis.
In an analysis of data from The Cancer Genome Atlas, we found that GRK3 expression is frequently decreased in glioblastoma (GBM) of the classical subtype, which possesses signature amplification or mutational activation of the epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor.
We tested the correlation between GRK3 expression and GBM subtypes, as well as the relationship between the activation of the EGF and other growth factor receptor pathways and GRK expression.
In analyses of primary GBM tissue and RNA specimens, we found that GRK3 expression is correlated with established criteria for GBM subtyping including expression of EGF receptor, platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR)Alfa, NF1, PTEN, CDKN2A, and neurofilament.
Together, these experiments show that GRK3 is a negative regulator of cell growth whose expression is preferentially reduced in GBM of the classical subtype as a consequence of activity in primary gliomagenic pathways.
Candidates include members of the pir superfamily found in the human parasite Plasmodium vivax (vir), in the simian pathogen Plasmodium knowlesi (kir) and in the rodent malarias Plasmodium yoelii (yir), Plasmodium berghei (bir) and Plasmodium chabaudi (cir).
Immmunohistochemically, human kallikrein protein (hK9) was localized in the cytoplasm, but not in the nuclei, of the epithelial cells of ovarian cancer tissues.
Epidermolytic palmoplantar keratosis (EPPK) cosegregates with breast and ovarian cancers in a large French pedigree, raising the possibility that a single genetic mutation might cause these conditions and offering a potential lead to the identification of a hereditary breast/ovarian cancer gene.
Although inheritance of this mutation is likely responsible for EPPK, it is unlikely to be the cause of the breast and ovarian cancer.
In contrast to the low expression of SRCL in the wild-type mouse brain, in a double transgenic mouse model of AD (Tg-APP/PS1), immunohistochemistry showed that SRCL was markedly induced in Abeta-positive astrocytes and Abeta-positive vascular/perivascular cells, which are associated closely with cerebral amyloid angiopathy.
This study aimed to determine whether plasma levels of tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) and soluble TNF receptor (sTNF-R) increases in rheumatic mitral stenosis (MS) patients with sinus rhythm and to examine the effect of percutaneous mitral balloon valvuloplasty (PMBV) on these parameters.
Plasma concentrations of TNF-alpha and the extent of calcium deposits were significantly higher in patients with aortic valve stenosis compared with individuals with mitral valve stenosis.
In conclusion, the plasma concentrations of TNF-alpha of patients with rheumatic mitral stenosis were significantly higher than those of healthy volunteers.
In addition, there was a significantly direct relationship between the soluble TNF-alpha and IL-10 concentrations in the atrial and peripheral venous blood, indicating a balance between circulating TNF-alpha and IL-10 levels in patients with rheumatic mitral stenosis.
To ascertain whether elevated levels of circulating proinflammatory cytokines in patients with advanced heart failure are due to congestive heart failure or due to cachexia or infection complicating heart failure, we measured prospectively plasma concentrations of tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), interleukin-1 beta (IL-1 beta), interleukin 2 (IL-2), and interleukin-6 (IL-6) in 12 patients with mitral stenosis with moderate congestive heart failure, but not with cachexia or infection.
Salivary inflammation was studied in an additional 86 age-matched subjects (43 controls/43 patients with cirrhosis); significantly higher interleukin (IL)-6/IL-1Beta, secretory IgA, and lower lysozyme, and histatins 1 and 5 were found in patients with cirrhosis, compared to controls.
In contrast, lysozyme was a marker of both brain and liver disease.
Myocardial infarction was induced in 8 dogs by ligation of the left anterior descending coronary artery, 4 of which were reperfused after 3 hr Gd-Mesoporphyrin (0.05 mmol/kg) was injected intravenously 210 min after the onset of ischemia (n = 6) or after 24 hr in 2 dogs with non-reperfused infarctions.
Consistent with this, variola virus complement regulator SPICE (smallpox inhibitor of complement enzymes) exhibits selectivity in inhibiting the human alternative complement pathway and vaccinia virus complement regulator VCP (vaccinia virus complement control protein) displays selectivity in inhibiting the bovine alternative complement pathway.
One of the spice long pepper has been traditionally used to treat chronic bronchitis, asthma, constipation, gonorrhea, paralysis of the tongue, diarrhea, cholera, malaria, viral hepatitis, respiratory infections, stomach ache, diseases of the spleen, cough, and tumors.
Dried plant parts used as culinary spices (CSs) in food are permitted as dietary ingredients in dietary supplements (DSs) within certain constraints in the United States.
Curcumin, a yellow pigment present in the spice turmeric (Curcuma longa), can be used for the treatment of several diseases including HIV-AIDS because of its antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, anticancer, antiviral, and antibacterial nature.
In their own right, urocortins may be clinically relevant molecules in the pathogenesis or management of many conditions, including congestive heart failure, hypertension, gastrointestinal and inflammatory disorders (irritable bowel syndrome, active gastritis, gastroparesis, and rheumatoid arthritis), atopic/allergic disorders (dermatitis, urticaria, and asthma), pregnancy and parturition (preeclampsia, spontaneous abortion, onset, and maintenance of effective labor), major depression and obesity.
This effect of Ucn may explain stress-induced disorders, such as atopic dermatitis or psoriasis, and may lead to new forms of treatment.
Inherited, autosomal dominant spinocerebellar ataxia type 11 (SCA11) is caused by loss of function mutations of TTBK2 (tau tubulin kinase 2).
Spinocerebellar ataxia type 11 (SCA11) is rare and has previously been described in four families worldwide.
Mutations of TTBK2 are associated with spinocerebellar ataxia type 11.
TTBK2 is ubiquitously expressed in multiple tissues and genetically linked to spinocerebellar ataxia type 11.
Loss of function mutations of TTBK2 lead to autosomal dominant spinocerebellar ataxia type 11 (SCA11).
ADCA Type III consists of six subtypes, SCA5, SCA6, SCA11, SCA26, SCA30, and SCA31.
Dominant truncating mutations in human TTBK2 cause spinocerebellar ataxia type 11 (SCA11); these mutant proteins do not promote ciliogenesis and inhibit ciliogenesis in wild-type cells.
Subsequently, point and Indel (Insertion/deletion) mutation analyses of SCA5, SCA11, SCA13, SCA14, SCA15/16/29, SCA27, SCA31 and SCA35 were detected in 91 families with ADCA and 196 patients with sporadic ataxias excluded from SCA1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 10, 12, 17 and DRPLA genotypes via PCR and Denaturing High Performance Liquid Chromatography (PCR-DHPLC), Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification and DNA direct sequencing analysis.
While SCA12, SCA17 and SCA35 are seldom found, SCA5, SCA8, SCA10, SCA11, SCA13, SCA27, SCA31 and DRPLA are very rare.
Mutations that truncate the C-terminal non-catalytic moiety of TTBK2 (tau tubulin kinase 2) cause the inherited, autosomal dominant, SCA11 (spinocerebellar ataxia type 11) movement disorder.
In addition, miR-940 may modulate the suppressive effects of fetal KCson the cell proliferation, differentiation and extracellular matrix synthesis of HSFbs by directly targeting transforming growth factor-Beta1.
Target genes (e.g., cyclin-dependent kinase 6) of hsa-miR-942-5p were mainly enriched in cancer-related pathways, whereas target genes (e.g., CRK-Like Proto-Oncogene, Adaptor Protein) of hsa-miR-940 were enriched in the ErbB signaling pathway.
Herein, we demonstrated that hypoxia induces the high expression of microRNA-940 (miR-940) in exosomes derived from epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC).
Results: Expressions of hsa-mir-1180, hsa-mir-149, hsa-mir-744 and hsa-mir-940 were all up regulated in high invasion capable cell lines (SNU423, SNU449) and vascular invasion patients with hepatocellular carcinoma (logFC&gt;1, P&lt;0.05).
Results from the Survival analysis showed that hsa-mir-1180 (HR=1.623, 95% CI: 1.114-2.365, P=0.012), hsa-mir-149 (HR=2.400, 95% CI: 1.639-3.514) and hsa-mir-940 (HR=1.704, 95%CI: 1.188-2.443, P=0.004) were independent risk factors on the prognosis of patients with hepatocellular carcinoma (P&lt;0.05).
Conclusion: With TCGA and GEO data mining, we found that hsa-mir-1180, hsa-mir-149, hsa-mir-744 and hsa-mir-940 were all highly related to the prognosis of hepatocellular carcinoma, that enabled it to be used to further study the biomarkers related to the prognosis of hepatocellular carcinoma.
#目#的#： #通#过#对GEO (Gene Expression Omnibus) #与TCGA (The Cancer Genome Atlas) #数#据#库#分#析, #挖#掘#肝#癌#血#管#侵#袭#相#关#的microRNA, #并#分#析#其#预#后#和#可#能#机#制#。 #方#法#： #利#用GEO#数#据#库#获#得#肝#癌#血#管#侵#袭microRNA#芯#片#数#据 (GSE67140) , #对5#种#侵#袭#能#力#不#同#的#细#胞#系 (SNU423#、SNU449#、HepG2#、Hep3B#、SNU398) #表#达#谱#进#行#差#异#分#析, #并#在81#份#血#管#侵#袭#阳#性#组#织#样#本#与91#份#血#管#侵#袭#阴#性#组#织#样#本#中#验#证#差#异#分#析#结#果#。#结#合TCGA#数#据#库#中362#例#肝#癌#病#例#数#据#分#析#其#预#后, #并#对microRNA#所#调#控#的#基#因#进#行GO#与KEGG#分#析#。 #结#果#： hsa-mir-1180#、hsa-mir-149#、hsa-mir-744#、hsa-mir-940#在#侵#袭#能#力#强#的#肝#癌#细#胞#和#有#血#管#侵#袭#的#肝#癌#组#织#中#表#达#上#调 (logFC&gt;1, P&lt;0.05) #。#生#存#分#析#显#示, hsa-mir-1180 (HR=1.623, 95%CI#：1.114~2.365, P=0.012) #、hsa-mir-149 (HR=2.400, 95% CI#：1.639~3.514, P&lt;0.001) #、hsa-mir-744 (HR=1.679, 95%CI#：1.161~2.427, P=0.006) #、hsa-mir-940 (HR=1.704, 95%CI#：1.188~2.443, P=0.004) #是#肝#癌#病#例#预#后#独#立#危#险#因#素, #高#表#达#与#患#者#生#存#期#缩#短#显#著#相#关 (P&lt;0.05) #。GO#与KEGG#分#析#其#机#制#可#能#与#免#疫#反#应#、#细#胞#黏#附#、#紧#密#连#接#等#信#号#通#路#有#关#。 #结#论#： #通#过#对TCGA#与GEO#数#据#库#的#挖#掘, #初#步#发#现hsa-mir-1180#、hsa-mir-149#、hsa-mir-744#、hsa-mir-940#对#肝#癌#的#预#后#有#影#响, #可#作#为#肝#癌#预#后#的#生#物#标#志#物#。.
The high expression of miR-940 is associated with better survival in patients with ovarian serous cystadenocarcinoma.
In our study, real-time (RT) quantitative PCR indicated that miR-940 levels were upregulated in human cervical cancer tissue samples and cell lines.
Ectopic miR-940 accelerated cervical cancer cell growth, proliferation and cell cycle arrest in vitro as well as tumor formation in vivo.
p27 and PTEN were evidenced as direct targets for miR-940 and inhibition of p27 and PTEN recovered the suppressive function of miR-940-silenced cell towards to proliferation and tumorigenicity in cervical cancer cells.
In addition, miR-940 expression was inversely associated with p27 and PTEN expression levels and actively with cyclin D1 in cervical cancer specimens.
The results from our study demonstrated that miR-940 regulated p27 and PTEN post-transcriptionally and might play a significant role in cervical cancer development and progression.
Thus, miR-940 might provide a potential value as therapeutic target for cervical cancer treatment in future.
We aimed to explore the roles and regulatory mechanism of microRNA-940 (miR-940) in bladder cancer development.
The expressions of miR-940 in bladder cancer tissues and cells were measured.
miR-940 was up-regulated in bladder cancer tissues and cells.
Overexpression of miR-940 significantly increased bladder cancer cell proliferation, promoted migration and invasion, and inhibited cell apoptosis.
INPP4A and GSK3Beta were the direct targets of miR-940, and knockdown of INPP4A or GSK3Beta significantly increased cancer cell proliferation, migration and invasion, and inhibited cell apoptosis.
Our results indicate that overexpression of miR-940 may promote bladder cancer cell proliferation, migration and invasion, and inhibited cell apoptosis via targeting INPP4A or GSK3Beta and activating Wnt/Beta-catenin pathway.
We investigated the expressions of miR-940, miR-15a, miR-16 and IL-23 in plasma and thyroid tissues of PTC, nodular goiter and healthy people with qRT-PCR, and further analyzed the associations between their levels and the clinical characteristics of PTC.
Level of IL-23 expression was higher while levels of miR-940, miR-15a and miR-16 expression in the PTC tissues were lower compared with the nodular goiter tissues and perineoplastic thyroid tissues.
Expressions of miR-940, miR-15a, miR-16 and IL-23 in PTC tissues might be useful biomarkers and promising targets in the diagnosis of papillary thyroid carcinoma.
This study investigated the pivotal role of miR-940 in the progression of ovarian cancer and to reveal the possible molecular mechanism of its action.
Ovarian cancer OVCAR3 cells were transfected with the miR-940 vector, miR-940 inhibitor, and/or small interfering RNA (siRNA) targeting PKC-Delta (si-PKC-Delta), respectively.
Taken together, the results of our study suggest that upregulation of miR-940 may function as a suppressor in the progression of ovarian cancer by inhibiting cell proliferation and inducing apoptosis by targeting PKC-Delta.
This study may provide a basis for the possible application of miR-940 in illustrating the molecular pathogenic mechanism of ovarian cancer.
A case-control study of 266 patients (133 cases of leptospirosis and 133 controls) was constructed to evaluate the diagnostic sensitivity and specificity (DSe &amp; DSp) of both PCR assays.
To determine the diagnostic sensitivity (DSe) and specificity (DSp), clinical blood samples from 26 laboratory-confirmed and 107 negative patients suspected of leptospirosis were enrolled as a prospective consecutive cohort.
A group of unrelated patients (n=82), characterized by short stature, dysmorphology and X-ray abnormalities, of which mucopolysacharidoses, GM1 gangliosidosis, mucolipidosis type II/III and achondroplasia owing to FGFR3 G380R mutation had been excluded, were recruited in this study.
The various encephalopathies that are reviewed in this article include the following: early infantile epileptic encephalopathy or Ohtahara syndrome, early myoclonic encephalopathy, epilepsy of infancy with migrating focal seizures, West syndrome, severe myoclonic epilepsy in infancy (Dravet syndrome), Landau-Kleffner syndrome, Lennox-Gastaut syndrome, and epileptic encephalopathy with continuous spike-and-wave during sleep.
Mutations in the SCN1A gene are found in up to 80% of individuals with severe myoclonic epilepsy of infancy (SMEI), and mutations in KCNQ2 and KCNQ3 were identified in benign familial neonatal convulsions (BFNC) as well as in single families with Rolandic epilepsy (RE) and idiopathic generalized epilepsies (IGE).
Sequence analysis of the KCNQ2, Q3, and Q5 coding regions was performed in a screening sample consisting of 58 nuclear families with rolandic epilepsy.
An in-frame deletion of codon 116 in KCNQ2 (p.Lys116del) and a missense mutation in KCNQ3 (p.Glu299Lys) were detected in two index cases exhibiting rolandic epilepsy and benign neonatal convulsions.
Mutation analysis of families with rolandic epilepsy without neonatal seizures discovered three novel missense variations (KCNQ2 p.Ile592Met, KCNQ3 p.Ala381Val, KCNQ3 p.Pro574Ser).
early myoclonic encephalopathy to West syndrome 1, early infantile epileptic encephalopathy to West syndrome 1, West syndrome to Lennox-Gastaut syndrome 2.
We identified 421 genes that were differentially expressed between histologically normal thyroid tissues and all follicular neoplasms (P &lt; 0.01; fold-change &gt;2), 94 genes that distinguished follicular carcinomas from follicular adenomas (including PBP and CKS2), and 4 genes that distinguished aggressive follicular carcinomas from nonaggressive follicular carcinomas (NID2, TM7SF2, TRIM2, and GLTSCR2).
These segments are replicated and transcribed by a viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) that is made up of the influenza virus proteins PB1, PB2 and PA. To copy the viral RNA (vRNA) genome segments and the complementary RNA (cRNA) segments, the replicative intermediate of viral replication, the RdRp must use two promoters and two different de novo initiation mechanisms.
Taken together, our genome-wide study of NP-vRNA interaction has implications for the understanding of influenza vRNA architecture and genome packaging.
Twelve nucleotides located at the 3' end of viral genomic RNA (vRNA) are conserved among influenza A viruses (IAV) and have a promoter function.
Influenza A virus (IAV) consists of eight viral RNA (vRNA) segments that are replicated in the host cell nucleus and transported to the plasma membrane for packaging into progeny virions.
Taken together, our data suggest that cytoplasmic transport of influenza vRNA may include a Rab11A RE-independent mechanism.IMPORTANCE IAV infections cause a large public health burden through seasonal epidemics and sporadic pandemics.
Double immunofluorescent analyses revealed nuclear retention and apparent colocalization of RanGap1 with Nup205, Gp210 with Nup205, and partial colocalization of Nup205 with Nup107; most of the ischemic changes above were similar to those observed in patients with C9orf72-genetic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Polymorphisms of PDGFRB, MMP-3, TIMP-2, RNF213, TGFB1, Raptor and eNOS genes have been associated with Moyamoya disease (MMD) separately in studies, but their interactions on MMD have never been evaluated in one study.
We genotyped 17 SNPs in or adjacent to 11 genes (ELN, LIMK1, CDKN2A/B, CXCL12, Pseudogene ENSG00000197218, PSRC1, MTHFD1L, SMAD3, MIA3, PDGF-B, TIMP2) comparing 40 DNA samples of Moyamoya disease patients to 68 healthy controls from central Europe.
The genes encoding tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase (TIMP) 4 and TIMP2 span chromosomes 3p24.2-p26 and 17q25, respectively, which are the locations of familial moyamoya disease (FMMD) genes.
We report the first case of trisomy 18 with truncus arteriosus type II.
Loss of immunohistochemical staining for the protein product of the SMAD4 gene and positive staining for mesothelin support a diagnosis of ductal adenocarcinoma.
Loss of immunohistochemical staining for the protein product of the SMAD4 gene and positive staining for mesothelin support a diagnosis of ductal adenocarcinoma.
To evaluate the diagnostic and prognostic significance of mesothelin, immunohistochemistry was used to assess the level of mesothelin  protein in surgically resected, formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded invasive breast carcinoma specimens.
To investigate the utility of 26 immunohistochemical markers (CAM 5.2, CK [cytokeratin] 7, CK20, CK17, CK19, MUC1, MUC2, MUC4, MUC5AC, MUC6, p53, DPC4/SMAD4, CDX2, pVHL [von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor gene protein], S100P, IMP-3 [insulin-like growth factor 2 messenger RNA binding protein 3], maspin, mesothelin, claudin 4, claudin 18, annexin A8, fascin, PSCA [prostate stem cell antigen], MOC31, CEA [carcinoembryonic antigen], and CA19-9 [cancer antigen 19-9]) in the diagnosis of ductal adenocarcinoma of the pancreas.
The results demonstrated that (1) more than 90% of cases of ductal adenocarcinoma were positive for maspin, S100P, and IMP-3; (2) nearly all adenocarcinoma cases were negative for pVHL, whereas nonneoplastic ducts and acini were positive for pVHL in all cases; (3) normal/reactive pancreatic ducts were frequently positive for CK7, CK19, MUC1, MUC6, CA19-9, MOC31, PSCA, mesothelin, annexin A8, claudin 4, and claudin 18; (4) normal pancreatic ducts were usually negative for IMP-3, maspin, S100P, CK17, MUC2, MUC4, and MUC5AC; (5) 60% of adenocarcinomas were negative for DPC4/SMAD4; and (6) strong background staining was frequently seen with fascin, PSCA, and annexin A8.
This study evaluated the utility of mesothelin and mammaglobin antibodies in differentiating breast carcinoma (particularly those with a papillary morphology) from Mullerian serous carcinomas.
Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded archival tissue from 21 breast carcinomas (10 micropapillary, 11 usual type ductal carcinomas) and 20 serous carcinomas (12 ovarian and 8 uterine) in addition to 6 cases of metastatic breast cancer to the ovary (5 cases) and cervix (1 case) were evaluated for the pattern and intensity of reactivity to antibodies to mesothelin, mammaglobin, and GCDFP-15.
None of the breast carcinomas stained for mesothelin, whereas 8/12 and 3/8 ovarian and uterine serous carcinomas were positive; however, 7 of these had less than 10% positivity.
We investigated HLA-class I APM components (Delta, LMP-7/10, TAP-1, Calnexin, Tapasin, Beta2-microglobulin and HLA-A,B,C) in LCs from healthy donors skin and melanoma patients SLN.
Recently, expression of the immunoproteasome subunits low molecular protein (LMP) 2 or LMP7 was shown to reduce the presentation of certain major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I-restricted tumour peptide epitopes in renal cell carcinoma and melanoma cells.
Immunohistochemical staining with anti-LMP2 and anti-LMP7 xenoantibodies showed a significantly higher expression of these immunoproteasome subunits in primary melanoma lesions exhibiting histological signs of tumour regression than in primary melanoma lesions without regression phenomena.
In spontaneously regressing melanoma lesions, LMP2 and LMP7 expression was significantly associated with the presence of tumour-infiltrating lymphocytes.
Our results are compatible with the possibility that the expression of the immunoproteasome subunits LMP2 and LMP7 rather than their downregulation in melanoma cells is associated with the presence of a successful anti-melanoma immune response.
Seventeen formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded primary melanomas thinner than 0.76 mm and 21 thicker than 1.50 mm were stained with anti-LMP2, -LMP7, -TAP1, -TAP2, -HLA class I and -beta2-microglobulin monoclonal antibodies.
We postulate here that the MHC class I-deficient phenotype of B16 melanoma cells is attributable to down-regulation or the loss of the expression and function of multiple components of the MHC class I antigen-processing pathway, including the peptide transporter associated with antigen processing, the proteasome subunits LMP2, LMP7, and LMP10, PA28alpha and -beta, and the chaperone tapasin.
Primary aldosteronism (PA) caused by aldosterone-producing adenoma (APA), but not by bilateral hyperplasia (BAH), has somatic mutations in KCNJ5 gene.
A correct diagnosis of primary aldosteronism (PA) requires adrenal venous sampling (AVS) for the classification of subtypes (bilateral hyperplasia, BAH, or adenoma, APA).
The detection of primary aldosteronism is of particular importance, not only because it provides an opportunity for a targeted treatment (surgical for APA and medical with mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists for BAH), but also because it has been extensively demonstrated that patients affected by PA are more prone to cardiovascular events and target organ damage than essential hypertensives.
This retrospective study was aimed 1) to compare the difference of the findings between adrenal CT scan and adrenal venous sampling (AVS) in 35 cases with definite primary aldosteronism (PA) for assessment of the diagnostic efficacy of PA subgroup (unilateral and bilateral adrenal hypersecretion: UAH and BAH), and 2) to determine the clinical and biochemical parameters as potential predictors for PA subgroup.
The expression of SLC4A11 in the corneal endothelium and inner ear patterns the deficits seen in CHED with corneal edema and hearing loss (Harboyan syndrome).
Slc4a11(-/-) mice manifest corneal oedema and distorted endothelial cells, consistent with loss of a water-flux.
Geographically different strains of Borrelia burgdorferi sensu lato (B. burgdorferi sensu stricto Ir 105, B. burgdorferi s.s. + B. afzelii V 123, B. garinii Ir 112 - isolates from eastern Slovakia, B. garinii K24 - isolate from western Slovakia and B. burgdorferi s.s. B 31 - American strain) were compared as antigens for serological study of Lyme borreliosis by IgG ELISA on a group of horses from eastern Slovakia.
It is genetically different from the B-31 reference strain of B. burgdorferi sensu stricto that is typical of strains causing Lyme borreliosis in North America.
On the other hand Contactin 1 drives Notch signalling activation via the Hes pathway, which could be consistent with its ability to modulate neuroinflammation events, and with the possibility that Contactin 1-dependent interactions may participate to the pathogenesis of the Multiple Sclerosis and of other inflammatory disorders.
To illustrate this approach, and to serve as 'proof-of-principle', we used 3 late-onset Alzheimer's disease GWAS datasets to explore SNP-disease associations in 4 new candidate genes encoding cerebro-spinal fluid biomarkers for Alzheimer's disease; Fibrinogen Gamma-chain (FGG), SPARC-like1 (SPARCL1), Contactin-1 (CNTN1) and Contactin-2 (CNTN2).
In secondary progressive MS (SPMS) four additional proteins (contactin 1, fetuin A, vitamin D binding protein and angiotensinogen (ANGT)) were increased as compared to control subjects.
A series of triblock (TB, polycaprolac- tone-polyethylene glycol-polycaprolactone (PCL-PEG-PCL), B-A-B) and pentablock copolymers (PBCs) (polylactic acid (PLA)-PCL-PEG-PCL-PLA (C-B-A-B-C) and PEG-PCL-PLA-PCL-PEG (A-B-C-B-A)) were synthesized and evaluated for their thermosensitive behavior.
Moreover, kinematic viscosity of aqueous solution at 25C for A-B-C-B-A type of PBCs was noticeably lower than the TB (B-A-B) copolymers and other PBCs with C-B-A-B-C block arrangements suggesting desired syringe- ability.
The presence of PLA blocks in PBCs (C-B-A-B-C and A-B-C-B-A) significantly reduces crystallinity.
In the study cohort of 145 patients implanted with DDD pacemakers with a programmable rest rate (RR) feature, the BR/RR settings were sequentially but randomly adjusted as follows: 60 bpm/Off for the baseline quarter (initial 3 months) and then to either 'A-B-C' or 'C-B-A' settings (A = 70/65 bpm, B = 70/Off, C = 80/65 bpm) for the subsequent quarters each of 3 months duration.
The treatment sequences were A-B-C; A-C-B; B-A-C; B-C-A; C-A-B; and C-B-A.
We could also show a physical association of Arc35p with subunits of CKII, Cmd1p, and Tub4p.
Our results suggest that B7-H1, B7-H3 and B7-H4 may be potential biomarkers to identify LCS, and a clear understanding of their functional roles may further elucidate the pathogenesis of this carcinoma and potentially contribute to the development of novel immunotherapeutic strategies.
We conclude that both GCDH activity and GCDH mutation analysis should be considered in the differential diagnosis of progressive forms of early-onset generalized dystonia and that mitochondrial fatty acid metabolism is one important pathway in the development of dystonia.
As lysine restriction and L: -carnitine supplementation are important treatments for GCDH deficiency, identification of this deficiency in patients with progressive forms of early-onset generalized dystonia has potential treatment implications.
SUCLA2 defects have been associated with mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) depletion and the triad of hypotonia, dystonia/Leigh-like syndrome, and deafness.
The findings indicate the importance of screening for mitochondrial dysfunction in patients with complex movement disorders without brain MRI lesions and further investigation for potential secondary CoQ10 deficiency in patients with SUCLA2 mutations.
SUCLA2 mutations result in a mitochondrial disorder that manifests as deafness, lesions in the basal ganglia, and encephalomyopathy accompanied by dystonia.
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and liver involvement was exclusively found in patients with SUCLG1 mutations, whereas epilepsy was much more frequent in patients with SUCLA2 mutations compared to patients with SUCLG1 mutations.
Mutations in SUCLA2 lead to a mitochondrial disorder manifesting as encephalomyopathy with dystonia, deafness and lesions in the basal ganglia.
Recent studies reported aberrant expression of placenta-specific microRNAs (miRNAs) in preeclampsia including miR-517a/b and miR-517c.
Using placental biopsies from a preeclampsia case-control study, we found increased expression of miR-517a/b in term and preterm preeclampsia vs controls, while, miR-517c was increased only in preterm preeclampsia vs controls.
In summary, we demonstrate that miR-517a/b and miR-517c contribute to the development of preeclampsia and suggest that these miRNAs play a critical role in regulating trophoblast and placental function.
We tested initially microRNAs (mir-135b and miR-517a) which presence in maternal circulation had been previously demonstrated and those microRNAs (miR-518b and miR-517a) with up-regulated expression profile in placentas derived from pregnancies during the onset of preeclampsia.
The observed phenotypes for these recessive variants were novel (e.g., FBN2-related myopathy and CSF1R-related brain malformation and osteopetrosis), typical (e.g., ACTG2-related visceral myopathy), or an apparently healthy state (e.g., PDE11A), consistent with the corresponding mouse knockout phenotypes.
One of these, located in the phosphodiesterase 11A (PDE11A) gene (R307X), has previously been reported to cause loss of PDE11A function and Cushing's syndrome in female carriers.
One percent of the Swedish population carries a PDE11A loss-of-function mutation associated with elevated BP, abdominal obesity, and risk of ischemic stroke.
Recently, important mechanisms underlying the pathogenesis of adrenal hypercortisolism have been elucidated with the discovery of mutations in cyclic AMP signalling (PRKACA, PRKAR1A, GNAS, PDE11A, PDE8B), armadillo repeat containing 5 gene (ARMC5) a putative tumour suppressor gene, aberrant G-protein-coupled receptors, and intra-adrenal secretion of ACTH.
Recently, important mechanisms underlying the pathogenesis of adrenal hypercortisolism have been elucidated with the discovery of mutations in cyclic AMP signalling (PRKACA, PRKAR1A, GNAS, PDE11A, PDE8B), armadillo repeat containing 5 gene (ARMC5) a putative tumour suppressor gene, aberrant G-protein-coupled receptors, and intra-adrenal secretion of ACTH.
Seven members of her family were screened for Cushing syndrome and Carney complex, and their blood DNA was extracted and sequenced for PRKAR1A, PDE11A, PDE8B and CTNNB1 mutations with ABI3730.
We report one case with affectation of jugular foramen which clinically debuted as a peripheral vertigo and the diagnosis was made by CT, IRM and angiography.
In patients with indolent systemic mastocytosis with a history of Hymenoptera venom exposure after age 15 years or greater (n = 152), MIMA and age at the most recent Hymenoptera sting were independent predictors for HVAn (odds ratios of 0.723 [P = .001] and 1.062 [P &lt; .001], respectively).
The excretion of MH but not MIMA increased in four patients (ages 37, 45, 61 and 65 years) and decreased in two patients (ages 26 and 48 years), including the only patient with paediatric-onset cutaneous mastocytosis.
Our data show that the activity of adult-onset indolent mastocytosis, as measured by urinary excretion of MH and MIMA and clinical signs and symptoms, can substantially decline, especially in older patients.
ADAM10 (A Disintegrin and Metalloprotease Domain 10) affects the pathophysiology of various cancers, and we had shown that inhibition of ADAM10 sensitizes pancreatic cancer cells to gemcitabine.
ADAM10 is activated in response to calcium influx, and here we examined if calcium channel blockers (CCB) would impede ADAM10 activation and affect biology of pancreatic cancer cells.
Furthermore, analysis of human pancreatic tumor tissue microarrays and lysates showed elevated levels of ADAM10, suggesting that aberrant activation of ADAM10 plays a fundamental role in growth and metastasis of PDACs and inhibiting this pathway might be a viable strategy to combat PDACs.
In the present report we describe the release of high levels of the ectodomain of Fat1 cadherin into the secretomes of human pancreatic cancer cells in vitro, a process that is mediated by ADAM10.
Fat1 and its sheddase ADAM10 are overexpressed in pancreatic adenocarcinomas and ectodomain shedding is also recapitulated in vivo leading to increased Fat1 serum levels in some pancreatic cancer patients.
Therefore, the aim of our study was to evaluate the expression and potential function of ADAM10 in the pathophysiology of pancreatic cancer (PDAC).
The homogeneous reactivity for CD99, the negativity for Bcl-2 and lack of the honeycomb infiltration of the subcutis help to rule out myxoid dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans, whereas the negativity for MUC4 and Bcl-2 are helpful tools to rule out low-grade fibromyxoid sarcoma and spindled-cell lipoma, respectively.
In process, we have identified chromosomal aberration in 1p, 7, 10, 13 and 17q, high frequency of functional germline SNP of the T gene, rs2305089 (P = 0.0038) and several recurrent alterations including MUC4, NBPF1, NPIPB15 mutations and novel gene fusion of SAMD5-SASH1 for the first time in skull base chordoma.
We confirm in our two cases that the distinct pattern of immunohistochemical staining for MUC4, associated with the absence of staining for both SATB2, a marker of osteoblastic differentiation, and pan-cytokeratin, allows differentiating between sclerosing epithelioid fibrosarcoma and metastatic carcinoma or osteosarcoma.
Significantly higher levels of interleukin (IL)-8 (p &lt; 0.001), eotaxin (p &lt; 0.001), interferon gamma-induced protein (IP)-10 (p &lt; 0.001) and macrophage inflammatory protein-1-beta (MIP-1Beta; p &lt; 0.001) were observed in aqueous of chronic PACG patients compared to controls.
This is the first study reporting significantly increased levels of eotaxin, MIP-1Beta, and IP-10 and lower levels of TNF-Alfa, IL-5, IL-9, IL-17, and GM-CSF in chronic PACG patients, suggesting a plausible role of these inflammatory cytokines in its pathogenesis.
Concentrations were as follows: IL-8, IP-10, MCP-1, and MIP-1Beta: POAG and NVG higher than cataract; IL-9: POAG lower than NVG; IL-12: POAG lower than cataract or NVG; and VEGF: NVG higher than cataract or POAG and POAG lower than cataract.
In zone1, lower concentration of IP-10 compared to baseline or higher concentration of macrophage inflammatory protein (MIP) -Alfa, and in zone 2, lower concentration of IL-5 compared to baseline, IL-8, and IP-10 or higher concentration of eotaxin-1 and MIP-1Beta were associated with improved DME.
Among BK eyes, the IL-6 and IFN-Gamma levels were elevated in eyes with pseudophakic BK (PBK), Fuchs' endothelial corneal dystrophy (FECD), postkeratoplasty, posttrabeculectomy, and postlaser iridotomy (LI) (all, P &lt; 0.04), whereas IL-1Alfa, IL-10, IL-17A, MIP-1Beta, and sICAM-1 levels were elevated only in PBK, postkeratoplasty, posttrabeculectomy, and post-LI eyes (all, P &lt; 0.05).
Part 1 focuses on anti-metabotropic glutamate receptor 1-, anti-Homer protein homolog 3-, anti-Sj/inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor- and anti-carbonic anhydrase-related protein VIII-associated autoimmune cerebellar ataxia (ACA); part 2 covers anti-protein kinase C gamma-, anti-glutamate receptor delta-2-, anti-Ca/RhoGTPase-activating protein 26- and anti-voltage-gated calcium channel-associated ACA; and part 3 reviews the current knowledge on anti-Tr/delta notch-like epidermal growth factor-related receptor-, anti-Nb/AP3B2-, anti-Yo/cerebellar degeneration-related protein 2- and Purkinje cell antibody 2-associated ACA, discusses differential diagnostic aspects and provides a summary and outlook.
Part 1 focuses on anti-metabotropic glutamate receptor 1-, anti-Homer protein homolog 3-, anti-Sj/inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor- and anti-carbonic anhydrase-related protein VIII-associated autoimmune cerebellar ataxia (ACA); part 2 covers anti-protein kinase C gamma-, anti-glutamate receptor delta-2-, anti-Ca/RhoGTPase-activating protein 26- and anti-voltage-gated calcium channel-associated ACA; and part 3 reviews the current knowledge on anti-Tr/delta notch-like epidermal growth factor-related receptor-, anti-Nb/AP3B2-, anti-Yo/cerebellar degeneration-related protein 2- and Purkinje cell antibody 2-associated ACA, discusses differential diagnostic aspects, and provides a summary and outlook.
Part 1 focuses on anti-metabotropic glutamate receptor 1-, anti-Homer protein homolog 3-, anti-Sj/inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor- and anti-carbonic anhydrase-related protein VIII-associated autoimmune cerebellar ataxia (ACA); part 2 covers anti-protein kinase C gamma-, anti-glutamate receptor delta-2-, anti-Ca/RhoGTPase-activating protein 26- and anti-voltage-gated calcium channel-associated ACA; and part 3 reviews the current knowledge on anti-Tr/delta notch-like epidermal growth factor-related receptor-, anti-Nb/AP3B2-, anti-Yo/cerebellar degeneration-related protein 2- and Purkinje cell antibody 2-associated ACA, discusses differential diagnostic aspects and provides a summary and outlook.
Lastly, a recent study identified delta/notch-like epidermal growth factor-related receptor (DNER) as the target antigen of Tr antibodies, a marker of cerebellar ataxia and Hodgkin's lymphoma.
A total of 835 RCCs, 143 chronic nephritis, 170 kidney stones and 415 health controls were collected for qRT-PCR, immunohistochemistry and Western blot analysis of CCP6 expression and mass spectrometry of DNAJC7 and polyglutamylated DNAJC7.
hnRNPA2B1 and hnRNPA1 mutations have been recently identified by exome sequencing in three families presenting with multisystem proteinopathy (MSP), a rare complex phenotype associating frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD), Paget disease of bone (PDB), inclusion body myopathy (IBM), and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Mutations in the prion-like domain (PrLD) of hnRNPA1 and A2/B1 genes were recently identified in 2 families with inclusion body myopathy associated with Paget disease of bone, frontotemporal dementia (FTD), and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and in ALS patients.
Patients with spring catarrh (vernal conjunctivitis) were studied for blood histamine (36) and plasma histaminase (16), and were compared with control histamine (22) and histaminase (19) levels.
Atp10c is a strong candidate gene for diet-induced obesity and type 2 diabetes.
Furthermore, a role for Atp8b3 in mouse sperm cell capacitation has been suggested, whereas deficiency of Atp10a and Atp10d leads to insulin resistance and obesity in mice.
Simulations of maternal deletion of ATP10A indicated an anabolic metabolism consistent with the known clinical phenotypes of obesity.
The purpose of this study was to assess the overall effect of the heterozygous deletion of Atp10c on obesity-related phenotypes and metabolic abnormalities in mice fed a high-fat diet.
Although sex differences were observed, our data suggest that heterozygous deletion along with an unusual pattern of maternal inheritance of the chromosomal region containing the single gene, Atp10c, causes obesity, type 2 diabetes, and nonalcoholic fatty liver disease in these mice.
The localization of Atp10a neighboring the maternally expressed gene Ube3a in the imprinted domain and an unusual inheritance pattern of the obesity phenotype with a p-locus deletion have suggested that Atp10a might be imprinted and associated with body fat.
Notably, transfer of cells from DNA-HSP65- or CpG/CFP-immunized MyD88(-/-) mice failed to reduce allergy.
However, the roles of other genes, such as CSF3 (colony stimulating factor 3 receptor), CD40, TNFSF14 (tumor necrosis factor receptor superfamily, member 14), IFNB1 (interferon-Beta1), TIRAP (toll-interleukin 1 receptor domain containing adaptor protein), IL2RA (interleukin 2 receptor Alfa), ETS1 (v-ets avian erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogene homolog 1), GADD45B (growth arrest and DNA-damage-inducible 45 Beta), BIRC3 (baculoviral IAP repeat containing 3), VAV1 (vav 1 guanine nucleotide exchange factor), COL5A1 (collagen, type V, Alfa1), and C3 (complement component 3), have not been investigated thoroughly in the process of periodontitis.
Compared with the normal controls, the levels of BMP4 in amniotic fluid and serum from the woman with a fetus with myelomeningocele were increased, whereas levels of Shh were increased in the woman pregnant with a fetus displaying anencephaly.
Absence of the sonic hedgehog (shh) ligand is associated with the midline defect holoprosencephaly, whereas increased Shh signaling is associated with exencephaly and spina bifida.
Large tumour suppressor kinase 2 (LATS2) was confirmed as a direct target of miR-372 using luciferase assays in these two prostate cancer cell lines.
Down-regulation of LATS2 could promote prostate cancer cell proliferation and migration just as overexpression of miR-372 did and overexpression of LATS2 could reverse this effect of miR-372.
Altogether, our data showed evidence that repressing the overexpression of miR-372 by As4 S4 could inhibit prostate cancer cell proliferation and migration by targeting LATS2.
Defective expression of LATS2, a negative regulator of YAP oncoprotein, has been reported in cancer of prostate, breast, liver, brain, and blood origins.
In support of these results, reduced expression and somatic mutations of FOXP3 correlated strongly with defective LATS2 expression in microdissected prostate cancer tissues.
The results suggest that LATS2 may play a role in AR-mediated transcription and contribute to the development of prostate cancer.
In conclusion, BM ameliorated tubulointerstitial damage in the Ald- and salt-induced hypertension model through suppression of both ROS production and intrarenal renin-angiotensin system activation.
Migraine and arterial hypertension may share common mechanisms like endothelial dysfunction, deficiency of autonomic cardiovascular regulation and renin angiotensin system involvement.
He was tentatively diagnosed as having idiopathic intracranial hypertension, and was later found to have atherosclerotic unilateral renovascular hypertension (RVH) based upon the extremely high plasma renin activity together with the radiological image tests.
Plasma angiotensin I (Ang I), angiotensin II (Ang II), plasma renin activity (PRA), aldosterone (Ald), creatinine, epinephrine, and norepinephrine (NE) were determined before and after treatments.
To investigate the regulatory effects of activation of the B7-H4 pathway on the function of activated T cells of patients with type 1 diabetes (T1D), we have used our in vitro human experimental system, including human Beta-cell antigen-specific T-cell clones and human Beta-cell lines CM and HP62, as well as primary islet cells.
Recently, we demonstrated that the phenotype of impaired negative costimulation, due to reduced levels of V-set domain-containing T cell activation inhibitor 1 (VTCN1) protein on APCs, is shared between diabetes-susceptible NOD mice and human T1D patients.
In this study, we show that a similar process takes place in the target organ, as both Alfa and Beta cells within pancreatic islets gradually lose their VTCN1 protein during autoimmune diabetes development despite upregulation of the VTCN1 gene.
In this review we outline the protective effect of B7-H4 in the contexts of T1D, islet cell transplantation, and potentially type 2 diabetes.
Current evidence offers encouraging data regarding the role of B7-H4 in reversal of autoimmune diabetes and donor-specific islet allograft tolerance.
Here, we unravel a general deficiency within the VTCN1 pathway that is shared between diabetes-prone mice and a subset of T1D patients.
We study here B7-H4 expression and its possible role in diabetes and cancer development.
Formalin-fixed, paraffin-processed pancreas samples from patients with type 1 diabetes (T1D), insulinoma, pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), and normal organ donors were studied by bright-field and multifluorescence immunohistochemistry to examine B7-H4 expression and its colocalization with islet endocrine hormones.
We have previously shown that the administration of B7-H4-immunoglobulin fusion protein (B7-H4.Ig), a newly identified T-cell co-inhibitory signaling molecule, blocks the onset of diabetes in NOD mice.
Variants originally associated with juvenile idiopathic arthritis (VTCN1 gene), sarcoidosis (ANXA11 gene), primary biliary cirrhosis (IL12RB2 gene) and celiac disease (LPP gene) were not associated with type 1 diabetes in our dataset.
Because B7x protein is expressed in some peripheral cells such as pancreatic Beta cells, we used a CD8 T cell-mediated diabetes model (AI4AlfaBeta) in which CD8 T cells recognize an endogenous self-Ag, and found that mice lacking B7x developed more severe diabetes than control AI4AlfaBeta mice.
Conversely, mice overexpressing B7x in the Beta cells (Rip-B7xAI4AlfaBeta) were diabetes free.
Furthermore, adoptive transfer of effector AI4AlfaBeta CD8 T cells induced diabetes in control mice, but not in Rip-B7xAI4AlfaBeta mice.
These results suggest that B7x in nonlymphoid organs prevents peripheral autoimmunity partially through inhibiting proliferation of tissue-specific CD8 T cells, and that local overexpression of B7x on pancreatic Beta cells is sufficient to abolish CD8 T cell-induced diabetes.
In Alzheimer's disease, the expression of SCGN in the hippocampus can boycott neurodegeneration.
In this article, we review the recent research progress of secretagogin, focus on its distribution and functions in various tumorous diseases and non-tumorous diseases, such as Alzheimer's disease.
Secretagogin has been hypothesized to exert a neuroprotective role in neurodegenerative diseases like Alzheimer's disease.
Indeed, the density, but not the morphological or neurochemical integrity, of secretagogin-positive neurons selectively decreases in the olfactory tract in Alzheimer's disease.
Our findings demonstrated for the first time the association of TAU and the calcium-binding protein SCGN and support earlier results implicating that beta-cells might represent an extra cerebral site of tauopathy.
The aim of our study was to characterize the association of clinicopathological variables and the SLC19A1/RFC-1 G80A polymorphism in methotrexate (MTX)-related toxicity in Portuguese patients with rheumatoid arthritis.
The current study was conducted to elucidate the effect of genetic variations in one-carbon metabolism on the epigenetic regulation of major histocompatibility complex II transactivator (MHC2TA), reduced folate carrier 1 (RFC1/SLC19A1) and human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-DR in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).
The majority of familial ALS (FALS) cases follow an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern, and include the following mutations: ALS1, Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase (SOD1); ALS3; ALS4, senataxin; ALS6, fused in sarcoma (FUS); ALS7; ALS8, vesicle-associated membrane protein; ALS9, angiogenin; ALS10, TAR DNA-binding protein (TARDBP); and ALS11/FIG4.
To clarify the role of cell adhesion molecules in cutaneous sarcoidosis, we induced sarcoid-like granulomatosis in mice deficient of intercellular adhesion molecule (ICAM)-1, L-selectin, P-selectin, or E-selectin via repeated P. acnes injection.
In this study, we evaluated the role of L-selectin in T lymphocyte alveolitis in patients with active pulmonary sarcoidosis.
Serum and BALF concentrations of sL-selectin were significantly elevated in patients with sarcoidosis compared with control healthy subjects and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) patients (P &lt; 0.05 and P &lt; 0.
The percentage of CD3+CD62L+ cells (L-selectin-bearing T lymphocytes) was significantly lower in peripheral blood of sarcoidosis than in that of healthy subjects (P &lt; 0.01).
In contrast, the percentage of CD3+CD62L- cells (L-selectin-negative T lymphocytes) in BALF of patients with sarcoidosis was significantly higher than in healthy subjects (P &lt; 0.05) and IPF patients (P &lt; 0.01).
Our results suggest that L-selectin may be involved in T lymphocyte alveolitis in patients with active pulmonary sarcoidosis.
In a cross-sectional study in patients with active and inactive sarcoidosis and in healthy volunteers, we examined, in serum and in BAL fluid, the soluble adhesion molecules, VCAM-1, ICAM-1, and P-, E- and L-selectin.
A significant correlation was observed between serum soluble L-selectin levels and the number of lymphocytes in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid of patients with sarcoidosis.
Endogenous ligands for tumor antigen may outperform single-chain variable fragments to serve as a component of CARs with high cancer recognition efficacy and minimized immunogenicity.
CARs targeting CD19, a cell surface molecule found in most leukemias and lymphomas, have yielded high remission rates in patients with chemorefractory, relapsed disease, including acute lymphoblastic leukemia, chronic lymphocytic leukemia, and non-Hodgkin lymphoma.
Congenital malformations of the central nervous system are related to alterations in neural tube formation, including most of the neurosurgical management entities, dysraphism and craniosynostosis; alterations of neuronal proliferation; megalencefaly and microcephaly; abnormal neuronal migration, lissencephaly, pachygyria, schizencephaly, agenesis of the corpus callosum, heterotopia and cortical dysplasia, spinal malformations and spinal dysraphism.
Compound mutants carrying mutations in both, the Reelin pathway and Lis1 exhibit hydrocephalus, a phenotype that is suppressed by mutations in the gene encoding the Alpha2 subunit of Pafah1b.
We previously demonstrated that compound mutations of Pafah1b1 with genes in Reelin pathway result in layering defects and the appearance of hydrocephalus in double mutant mice.
On an inbred genetic background, 20% of Lis1+/- mice develop hydrocephalus and die prematurely.
However, the presence of the APC mutation increases the migration deficit and the incidence of hydrocephalus in Lis1+/- animals.
Compound mutant mice with disruptions in the Reln pathway and heterozygous Pafah1b1 mutations had a higher incidence of hydrocephalus and enhanced cortical and hippocampal layering defects.
For example, holoprosencephaly is associated with HPE genes, hydrocephalus with L1-CAM and lissencephaly with LIS-1.
A genetic association study was then conducted on 146 multiplex families of the Collaborative study on Genetics of Alcoholism, in which seven single nucleotide polymorphisms located in the NTNG1 gene were genotyped.
Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome is a recessive disorder caused by mutations in 7-dehydrocholesterol reductase (DHCR)7 with a heterozygous (HET) carrier frequency of 1-3%.
Loss-of-function mutations in the enzyme 7-dehydrocholesterol reductase are responsible for the Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome, in which 7-dehydrocholesterol (7-DHC) levels are markedly increased in the plasma and tissues of patients.
Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome is an autosomal recessive disease caused by mutations in 7-dehydrocholesterol reductase (DHCR7), which is rarely observed in Japan.
In Dhcr7-deficient Neuro2a cells or fibroblasts from SLOS patients, the biosynthetic transformation was interrupted at the penultimate step and alkynyl-7-DHC (a-7-DHC) was the major product formed.
Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome is an inherited monogenic disorder in which mutations to the 7-dehydrocholesterol (7-DHC) reductase (Dhcr7) gene lead to deficits in cholesterol synthesis.
The purpose of this study was to identify a potential abnormal behavioral phenotype in a compound mutant mouse model for Smith-Lemli-Opitz disease (Dhcr7 Delta3-5/T93M ) to further validate the model and to provide potential targets for future therapeutic interventions.
Homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations in DHCR7 lead to the developmental disease Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome, which can also result in fetal mortality, highlighting the importance of this enzyme in human development and survival.
Smith-Lemli-Opitz Syndrome (SLOS) is a rare hereditary autosomal recessive disorder with broken cholesterol synthesis causing by 7-dehydrocholesterol reductase deficiency.
Largely, DHCR7 research is associated with the developmental disease Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome, which is caused by mutations in the DHCR7 gene.
In addition, an upregulation of E-selectin, ICAM-1 and VCAM-1 is also detected in liver biopsies obtained from patients with alcoholic hepatitis and cirrhosis.
In alcoholic hepatitis (AH), enhanced expression of intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) correlates to neutrophil infiltration and histology.
The aim of this study was to clarify the role of soluble intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (sICAM-1) and interleukin-8 (IL-8) in the development of severe alcoholic hepatitis.
The overexpression of intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) has been shown to be involved in the pathogenesis of various necroinflammatory diseases, including alcoholic hepatitis.
Moreover, 19 common DEGs (including upregulated BCL9L, PER2 and TSPAN33, and downregulated GMPS and HES1) associated with both OLP and OSCC were identified.
These findings indicated that BCL9L, GMPS, HES1, PER2 and TSPAN33 affected the transformation of OLP to OSCC.
Through genomic analysis of colorectal cancers and cell lines, we find frequent loss of heterozygosity and mutations in BCL9L in aneuploid tumors.
Plumbagin (1) was found to downregulate Wnt signaling when assessed by a TOPFlash/FOPFlash reporter activity assay and also decreased the expression of several coactivators and downstream targets of Wnt signaling such as Beta-catenin, TCF7L2, p300, Bcl9l, c-Myc, vimentin, and cyclinD1 in SW620 colorectal cancer cells.
Recently, we could distinguished patients with major depressive disorder (MDD) from nonpsychiatric controls with high accuracy using a panel of five gene expression markers (ARHGAP24, HDAC5, PDGFC, PRNP, and SLC6A4) in leukocyte.
Thus, PP2A can shift myeloma cells from apoptosis to autophagic cell death.
Given the central role of PP2A in regulating diverse biological functions and its dysregulation in many diseases, including cancer, PP2A directed therapeutics have become of great interest.
Here, we investigated the radiosensitizing effects of digoxin as a PP2A inhibitor in two non-small cell lung cancer cell types (H460 and A549) with differential sensitivity to radiation.
In conclusion, digoxin has a novel function as a PP2A inhibitor, and combined with IR produces a synergistic effect of radiosensitizing cells, thereby indicating a potentially promising therapeutic approach to radioresistant lung cancer treatment.
Therefore, it has been noted that PP2A could be a promising target for cancer therapy.
We conclude that PP2A might contribute to an early stage of chemical carcinogenesis, suggesting that PP2A could be a molecular target of primary cancer prevention.
In cancer cells, PP2A function can be compromised by several mechanisms, including sporadic mutations in its scaffolding A and regulatory B subunits or more frequently through overexpression of cellular PP2A inhibitors.
Here we identify a novel genetic mechanism by which PP2A function is recurrently affected in human cancer, involving haploinsufficiency of PPP2R4, a gene encoding the cellular PP2A activator PTPA.
Notably, up to 70% of cancer patients showed a heterozygous deletion or missense mutations in PPP2R4 Cancer-associated PTPA mutants exhibited decreased abilities to bind the PP2A-C subunit or activate PP2A and failed to reverse the tumorigenic phenotype induced by PTPA suppression, indicating they function as null alleles.
Our results provide evidence for PPP2R4 as a haploinsufficient tumor suppressor gene, defining a high-penetrance genetic mechanism for PP2A inhibition in human cancer.
CIP2A inactivates protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) which down-regulates Akt (Protein Kinase B) phosphorylation and stabilizes c-Myc (c-Myc oncogene product) in cancer cells.
At both sites, chronic kidney disease significantly lowered this TTR.
Multiple linear regression analysis showed CKD as an independent predictor of time in therapeutic range (TTR).
In the subgroup of patients with CKD, the SAMe-TT2 R2 (&gt;2 points) showed no significant predictive capacity for TTR (AUC 0.528, P = .354).
The SAMe-TT2 R2 score was not predictive of poor TTR in the subgroup with CKD, although a modest predictive value for poor TTR was found in those without CKD.
Hereditary transthyretin-related amyloidosis (ATTR-FAP) is characterized by a progressive neuropathy, cardiomyopathy, nephropathy and ocular disease.
Men showed increased levels of albumin and prealbumin, and women showed decreased proteinuria levels.
Here, the authors describe a 59-year-old woman harboring a purely intrapelvic sciatic notch schwannoma extrinsic to the sciatic nerve, which was totally removed via the infragluteal approach preserving sciatic function.
We describe a sciatic schwannoma spanning the sciatic notch in a 39-year-old woman with persistent pelvic pain after caesarean delivery.
A case is reported of schwannoma of the right masseteric nerve, invading the pterygopalatine fossa and the parapharyngeal space through the mandibular notch in a 61-year-old woman.
The most important aspects of this case are the anatomic site of the schwannoma and its uncommon clinicopathologic manifestations; this tumor originated from the masseteric nerve and is the first case reported to straddle the mandibular notch.
Tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase 3 (TIMP3) is an extracellular matrix (ECM) bound protein, which has been shown to be downregulated in human subjects and experimental models with cardiometabolic disorders, including type 2 diabetes mellitus, hypertension and atherosclerosis.
The aim of this study was to investigate whether polymorphisms in the tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase 3 gene (TIMP3) are associated with the risk of preeclampsia (PE) in Han Chinese women.
In 1996 a large Dutch family with an autosomal-dominant syndrome ("limb mammary syndrome", LMS, MIM *603543) characterized by hypoplasia/aplasia of mammary glands and nipples, ectrodactyly, other hand/foot anomalies, lacrimal-duct atresia, nail dysplasia, hypohidrosis, cleft palate/bifid uvula, hypodontia was reported.
Bone-acting factors were present in serum and RANKL, PTHrP and DKK1, key mediators of hypercalcemia and bone loss, were upregulated in Gzmb-HBZ T cells.
The seminal observations leading to these discoveries were the following: 1) mutations in FGF23 cause ADHR by limiting cleavage of the bioactive intact molecule, at a subtilisin-like protein convertase (SPC) site, resulting in increased circulating FGF23 levels and hypophosphatemia; 2) mutations in DMP1 cause ARHR, not only by increasing serum FGF23, albeit by enhanced production and not limited cleavage, but also by limiting production of the active DMP1 component, the C-terminal fragment, resulting in dysregulated production of DKK1 and Beta-catenin, which contributes to impaired bone mineralization; and 3) mutations in PHEX cause XLH both by altering FGF23 proteolysis and production and causing dysregulated production of DKK1 and Beta-catenin, similar to abnormalities in ADHR and ARHR, but secondary to different central pathophysiological events.
The aim of this study was therefore to explore serum levels of DKK-1 and to evaluate DKK-1's association with the severity of spinal involvement in diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH).
To evaluate the plasma levels of CCL2, CCL3, CCL11, CCL24, tumor necrosis factor alpha, sTNFR1, and sTNFR2 in subjects exposed to silica (SES) with and without silicosis compared with unexposed reference control group, and their associations with the radiological severity and duration of exposure to silica.
CCL3, CCL24, sTNFR1, and sTNFR2 were increased in SES and in SES with silicosis than in controls.
One hundred and sixty four cases were diagnosed as amino acid metabolic disorders with a prevalence of 1:11 349, including 83 with hyperphenylalaninaemia (1:22 400), 29 with neonatal intrahepatic cholestasis caused by citrin deficiency (1:64 138), 16 with methionine S-adenosyltransferase deficiency (1:116 250), 9 with maple syrup urine disease (1:206 667), 8 with argininemia (1:232 500), 7 with citrullinemia type I (1:265 700), 6 with hyperprolinemia type I (1:310 000), and 2 with carbamylphosphate synthetase I deficiency(1:930 000).
The simultaneous analysis and identification of &gt;400 metabolites in &gt;130 types of IMD was possible from the GC/MS results, where the IMDs included phenylketonuria, ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency, neonatal intrahepatic cholestasis caused by citrin deficiency, Beta-ureidopropionase deficiency and mitochondrial metabolic disorders.
We checked blood amino acids and acylcarnitines in 38 patients, which revealed phenylketonuria (PKU) in 2 patients, and one with suspected citrin deficiency.
Mutations in SLC25A13 cause citrin deficiency, which has three phenotypes: neonatal intrahepatic cholestasis caused by citrin deficiency (NICCD), failure to thrive and dyslipidemia caused by citrin deficiency (FTTDCD) and adult-onset type 2 citrullinemia (CTLN2).
Citrullinemia type II is an autosomal recessive urea cycle disorder and a subtype of citrin deficiency.
However, the management of recurrent hyperammonemia with neurologic symptoms in patients with citrullinemia type II is quite different from the management of other types of urea cycle disorders.
In pats with citrullinemia type II, regional anesthesia might be a good choice for the early detection of hyperammonemic symptoms and addressing psychic stress.
A 48-year-old male with adult onset citrullinemia type II was scheduled for urethral scrotal fistula repair.
For anesthesia of patients with adult onset citrullinemia type II, close monitoring of neurologic signs and serum ammonia are important to reduce neurologic complications induced by hyperammonemia.
Genetic causes of hypermethioninemia include mitochondrial depletion syndromes caused by mutations in the MPV17 and DGUOK genes and deficiencies of cystathionine Beta-synthase, methionine adenosyltransferase types I and III, glycine N-methyltransferase, S-adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase, citrin, fumarylacetoacetate hydrolase, and adenosine kinase.
These include N-acetylglutamate synthase deficiency (NAGSD); Carbamyl phosphate synthetase 1 deficiency (CPS1D); Ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency (OTCD); Argininosuccinate synthetase deficiency (ASSD) (Citrullinemia); Argininosuccinate lyase deficiency (ASLD) (Argininosuccinic aciduria); Arginase deficiency (ARGD, Argininemia); Hyperornithinemia, hyperammonemia, homocitrullinuria (HHH) syndrome (or mitochondrial ornithine transporter 1 deficiency [ORNT1D]); and Citrullinemia type II (mitochondrial aspartate/glutamate carrier deficiency [CITRIN]).
We report the first Turkish patient with citrin deficiency detected incidentally by phenylketonuria screening.
Genes that have been implicated in monogenic CVID include ICOS, TNFRSF13B (TACI), TNFRSF13C (BAFF-R), TNFSF12 (TWEAK), CD19, CD81, CR2 (CD21), MS4A1 (CD20), TNFRSF7 (CD27), IL21, IL21R, LRBA, CTLA4, PRKCD, PLCG2, NFKB1, NFKB2, PIK3CD, PIK3R1, VAV1, RAC2, BLK, IKZF1 (IKAROS) and IRF2BP2 With the increasing number of disease genes identified in CVID, it has become clear that CVID is an umbrella diagnosis and that many of these genetic defects cause distinct disease entities.
To examine whether anti-TG2 immunohistochemical (IHC) staining can be of diagnostic value in identifying extraintestinal involvement in CeD, tissue blocks of patients with IgA nephropathies (IgAN), minimal change disease, membranous glomerulonephritis, membrano-proliferative glomerulonephritis, normal kidney, intestinal biopsies from CeD, tropical sprue, nonspecific duodenitis, and inflammatory bowel disease; liver biopsies from patients with chronic hepatitis B and C, acute liver failure (ALF), and CeD-associated liver diseases were retrieved and subjected to IHC staining for anti-tissue transglutaminase 2 enzyme.
Transglutaminase-2 (TG2) is a new anti-fibrotic target for chronic kidney disease, for its role in altering the extracellular homeostatic balance leading to excessive build-up of matrix in kidney.
Upregulated TG2 and impaired renal function were apparent with EST delivery combined with folic acid-induced nephropathy.
The CD89xTG2 formula had a high ability to discriminate active from inactive IgAN/HSPN in both situations: CD89xTG2/proteinuria ratio (AUC: 0.84, P &lt; 0.001, sensitivity: 76%, specificity: 74%) and CD89xTG2/urinary creatinine ratio (AUC: 0.82, P &lt; 0.001, sensitivity: 75%, specificity: 74%).
Significant correlations between urinary CD89 and TG2 (r = 0.711, P &lt; 0.001), proteinuria and urinary CD89 (r = - 0.585, P &lt; 0.001), and proteinuria and urinary TG2 (r = - 0.620, P &lt; 0.001) were observed.
Mutations in ADP-ribosylation factor guanine nucleotide-exchange factor 2 (ARFGEF2) gene was recently recognized to cause bilateral periventricular nodular heterotopia, putaminal hyperintensity and movement disorder.
Mutations in the ARFGEF2 gene must be considered in the presence of bilateral periventricular nodular heterotopia and putaminal hyperintensity in children presenting with movement disorder, severe developmental delay and microcephaly.
We report a child with a severe choreadystonic movement disorder, bilateral periventricular nodular heterotopia (BPNH), and secondary microcephaly based on compound heterozygosity for two new ARFGEF2 mutations (c.2031_2038dup and c.3798_3802del), changing the limited knowledge about the phenotype.
Sections from 21 tumours diagnosed as primary or metastatic rhabdomyosarcoma were stained for alpha and beta enolase.
The results show that beta enolase is a sensitive marker of muscular differentiation in rhabdomyosarcoma.
Before treatment, a serum sample from a patient with rhabdomyosarcoma contained a high level of beta enolase and serum samples from patients with (ganglio)neuroblastoma contained high levels of gamma enolase.
A comparative study of beta enolase and myoglobin as markers of muscle differentiation in rhabdomyosarcoma was carried out, using an immunoperoxidase peroxidase antiperoxidase technique.
beta Enolase and myoglobin are useful in the histological diagnosis of rhabdomyosarcoma, and of the two, beta enolase seems to be the more sensitive.
The major observed phenotypes in Tmem218(-/-) mice were progressive cystic kidney disease and retinal degeneration.
Certain patients with lymphoma may harbor mutations in perforin 1 (PRF1), unc-13 homolog D (UNC13D), syntaxin 11 (STX11), STXBP2 (syntaxin binding protein 2) or SH2 domain containing 1A (SH2D1A), which causes functional defects of cytotoxic lymphocytes.
In the present study, 90 patients with lymphoma were analyzed for UNC13D, PRF1, STXBP2, STX11, SH2D1A and X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis.
Therefore, genes involved in these steps play important roles in the pathogenesis of HLH disease which include PRF1, UNC13D (MUNC13-4), STX11, and STXBP2 (MUNC18-2).
In the present study, we used exome sequencing to analyze PRF1, UNC13D, STX11, and STXBP2, as well as genes associated with primary immunodeficiency disease (RAB27A, LYST, AP3B1, SH2D1A, ITK, CD27, XIAP, and MAGT1) in Thai children with hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH).
mRNA expression of VDR and the metabolizing enzymes 1Alfa-hydroxylase (CYP27B1) and 24-hydroxylase (CYP24A1) were examined in BAT of mice models of obesity and during brown adipocyte differentiation.
We undertook a comprehensive analysis between 100 tagging single nucleotide polymorphisms (tagSNPs) in genes encoding for DHCR7, CYP2R1, VDBP, CYP27B1, CYP27A1, CYP24A1, VDR and RXRG, and obesity traits in 5224 participants (aged 45 years) in the 1958 British birth cohort (1958BC).
In the 1958BC (n=5224), after Bonferroni correction, none of the tagSNPs were associated with obesity traits except for one tagSNP from CYP24A1 that was associated with waist-hip ratio (WHR) (rs2296239, P=0.001).
Obesity is characterized by a decreased expression of the 25-hydroxylase CYP2J2 and the 1Alfa-hydroxylase CYP27B1 in SAT, whereas the catabolic CYP24A1 does not differ between lean and obese women.
These coumarins thus act as isoform-selective CA inhibitors with the possibility to target isoforms involved in pathologies such as obesity (CA VA/VB) or cancer (CA IX and XII) without inhibiting the physiologically dominant, highly abundant hCA I and II.
Specifically, FGFR loss of function counteracts renal FGF-23/Klotho signaling, leading to deregulation of Cyp27b1 and Cyp24a1 and the induction of hypervitaminosis D and hyperphosphatemia.
Here, we identify a significant decrease in PLOD3 expression and its encoded protein, the collagen modifying enzyme lysyl hydroxylase 3 (LH3), in RDEB.
Although NMZL shared with SMZL a common mutation profile, NMZL harbored PTPRD lesions that were otherwise absent in SMZL.
Collectively, these findings provide new insights into the genetics of NMZL, identify PTPRD lesions as a novel marker for this lymphoma across mature B-cell tumors, and support the distinction of NMZL as an independent clinicopathologic entity within the current lymphoma classification.
Together with mutations affecting CSMD2, CSMD3, and PTPRD, these findings may suggest that alterations in genes having a role in CNS development may facilitate diffuse large B-cell lymphoma manifestation in the CNS.
We have attempted to find out any relationships between circulating tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha levels and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) associated peripheral T-cell and NK-cell proliferative disease/lymphoma (PTPD/L) status.
Nineteen newly recruited patients of pemphigus vulgaris (PV) received monthly DCPs in phase I and were then randomized into two groups.
Although the DCP regimen is the standard therapy for pemphigus in India, we found no difference in the clinical outcome between patients receiving nine DCPs in phase II and patients shifted directly from phase I to III.
Satisfactory results were obtained in 22 of 27 cases of seborrhea, usually within the 1st 4 cycles.
After having received a total of 14 to 48 DCPS, further treatment for pemphigus was withdrawn.
The expression of polySia in metastatic and non-metastatic primary laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma (LSCC) tumor biopsy specimens was investigated by immunohistochemistry, while the expression of polysialyltransferase IV (ST8SiaIV)(), fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 (FGFR1), extracellular signal regulated kinases 1 and 2 (Erk 1/2) and c-Raf was tested in metastatic and non-metastatic primary tumor tissues (including the corresponding non-tumor control tissues) by Western blot analysis.
We previously reported that antisense human c-raf-1 cDNA transfection results in reduction of the endogenous c-raf-1 transcript, decreased tumor growth rate, and enhanced radiation sensitivity of SQ-20B tumor cells established from a radiation-resistant laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma.
Conclusion: In a GPA33-positive human colorectal cancer xenograft mouse model, we validated a SPECT/CT-based theranostic PRIT regimen that led to 100% complete responses and 100% cures without any treatment-related toxicities, based on high TIs for radiosensitive tissues.
These studies support the view that anti-GPA33 DOTA-PRIT will be a potent radioimmunotherapy regimen for GPA33-positive colorectal cancer tumors in humans.
GPA33 is a colorectal cancer (CRC) antigen with unique retention properties after huA33-mediated tumor targeting.
Furthermore, 19% of all heterozygous and 37% of all homozygous gpA33(DeltaN-Bcat) mice spontaneously developed aberrant crypt foci and adenomatous polyps, at frequencies and latencies akin to those observed in sporadic colon cancer in humans.
GPA33 is highly expressed in most human colorectal cancers and has been verified as a diagnostic and therapeutic target.
The A33scFv-Fc specifically binds GPA33-positive colorectal cancer cells and tumor tissues.
These results indicate that CF750-A33scFv-Fc can target GPA33, suggesting the potential of CF750-A33scFv-Fc as an imaging agent for the diagnosis of colorectal cancer.
A recombinant single-chain immunotoxin based on the ribotoxin Alfa-sarcin (IMTXA33AlfaS), produced in the generally regarded as safe (GRAS) yeast Pichia pastoris, has been recently described as a promising candidate for the treatment of colorectal cancer cells expressing the glycoprotein A33 (GPA33) antigen, due to its high specific and effective cytotoxic effect on in vitro assays against targeted cells.
Here we report the in vivo antitumor effectiveness of this immunotoxin on nude mice bearing GPA33-positive human colon cancer xenografts.
Thus, the genes contained in this ABCB1 amplicon including ABCB4, SRI, DBF4, TMEM243, and RUNDC3B are overexpressed in many cancers, and especially in MDR tumors, while TP53TG1 and DMTF1 are bona fide tumor suppressors.
In this study, we investigated the role of lncRNA-TP53TG1 in response to glucose deprivation in human gliomas.
The expression levels of TP53TG1 in glioma tissues and cells were analyzed by qRT-PCR.
The expression of TP53TG1 was significantly higher in human glioma tissues or cell lines compared with normal brain tissue or NHA.
Our data showed that TP53TG1 under glucose deprivation may promote cell proliferation and migration by influencing the expression of glucose metabolism related genes in glioma.
Herein, we have identified a p53-induced lncRNA, TP53TG1, that undergoes cancer-specific promoter hypermethylation-associated silencing.
TP53TG1 epigenetic inactivation in cancer cells releases the transcriptional repression of YBX1-targeted growth-promoting genes and creates a chemoresistant tumor.
The epigenetic loss of TP53TG1 therefore represents an altered event in an lncRNA that is linked to classical tumoral pathways, such as p53 signaling, but is also connected to regulatory networks of the cancer cell.
RNA expression analysis of 11 adenocarcinomas by reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction was performed for cancer-related genes residing at 7q21 (ABCB1, ABCB4, CDK6, HGF, DMTF1, SRI, TP53AP1) and 20q13 (ZNF217, BCAS1, CYP24, TNFRSF6B).
(2004) originally reported a significant association between TD and the NADPH quinine oxidoreductase 1 (NQO1) gene Pro187Ser (C609T, rs1800566) polymorphism in Korean schizophrenia patients; however, subsequent studies have not consistently replicated these findings.
Western blot analysis showed that compound 3 significantly down-regulated the expression of phosphorylated STAT3 in both human and mouse colon cancer cells indicating that the mechanism of action for compound 3 may involve the inhibition of JAK3/STAT3 signaling pathways.
In the present study, the expression of IL-1Beta, IL-2, IL-4, IFNGamma, TNF-Alfa, iNOS, COX-2, Jak3, Stat3 and NF-KB were increased in the early stages of experimental colorectal cancer.
JAK3 inhibitors may, therefore, be useful in the chemoprevention of colorectal cancer.
JAK3 inhibitors may therefore be useful in the prevention of colorectal cancer in individuals with FAP.
Placenta praevia complicated 2.54% of cases with a previous caesarean section compared with 0.44% of cases with no scar--a 5-fold increase.
Thus, modulating DDAH1 activity through FXR receptor agonists such as UDCA could be a therapeutic target for treating reduced nitric oxide bioavailability in congestive heart failure and other cardiovascular diseases.
The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of pharmacological treatment on symmetric dimethylarginine (SDMA), ADMA and arginine plasma concentrations in patients with acute congestive heart failure (ACHF) through the evaluation of type-1 system cationic amino acid transporter-1/type 1 dimethylarginine dimethylaminohydrolases-1 (CAT-1/DDAH-1).
In patients with ACHF, acute renal impairment function and the modulation of metabolism and extracellular transport by the DDAH-1/CAT-1 system determine high ADMA and SDMA levels after therapy for acute congestive heart failure.
Mutations in the ASS1 gene cause citrullinemia type I, a rare autosomal recessive disorder characterized by neonatal hyperammonemia, elevated citrulline levels, and early neonatal death.
Citrullinemia type I is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by mutation of the gene expressing ASS1 argininosuccinate synthetase, limiting enzyme of the urea cycle.
We show that two ASS1 genomic variants (namely, rs10901080 and rs10793902) can serve as pharmacogenomic biomarkers to predict hydroxyurea treatment efficacy in sickle cell disease/Beta-thalassemia compound heterozygous patients.
Citrullinemia type 1 (CTLN1) is an autosomal recessive disorder of metabolism caused by a deficiency of argininosuccinate synthetase.
Argininosuccinate synthetase deficiency (citrullinemia type 1) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder of the urea cycle characterized by elevated concentrations of citrulline, ammonia, and orotic acid, manifesting with acute hyperammonemic crises, usually early in life, with concurrent neurologic deterioration.
Classical citrullinemia type I (CTLN1) is an autosomal recessive disorder encoded by the ASS1 gene, which codes for argininosuccinate synthetase (ASS), the rate-limiting enzyme in the urea cycle.
CTLN2 is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by recurrent encephalopathy with hyperammonemia due to highly elevated plasma levels of citrulline and ammonia, caused by a deficiency of argininosuccinate synthetase in the liver.
Citrullinemia type I is an autosomal recessive disorder that is caused by a deficiency of the urea cycle enzyme argininosuccinate synthetase (ASS1).
Classical citrullinemia (CTLN1), a rare autosomal recessive disorder, is caused by mutations of the argininosuccinate synthetase (ASS) gene, localized on chromosome 9q34.1.
We studied the expression of BMPR-IA, -IB, and -II, ActR-I, ActR-II, and OP-1/BMP-7 by immunohistochemistry in ossified ligament tissues of patients with OPLL and control ligament tissues from patients with cervical disc herniation.
Genes that have been implicated in monogenic CVID include ICOS, TNFRSF13B (TACI), TNFRSF13C (BAFF-R), TNFSF12 (TWEAK), CD19, CD81, CR2 (CD21), MS4A1 (CD20), TNFRSF7 (CD27), IL21, IL21R, LRBA, CTLA4, PRKCD, PLCG2, NFKB1, NFKB2, PIK3CD, PIK3R1, VAV1, RAC2, BLK, IKZF1 (IKAROS) and IRF2BP2 With the increasing number of disease genes identified in CVID, it has become clear that CVID is an umbrella diagnosis and that many of these genetic defects cause distinct disease entities.
Second, patients presenting with cold-induced urticaria, granulomatous rash, autoantibodies, and common variable immunodeficiency, or with blistering skin lesions, bronchiolitis, enterocolitis, ocular inflammation, and mild immunodeficiency harbor distinct mutations in phospholipase CGamma2, encoding a signaling molecule expressed in natural killer cells, mast cells, and B lymphocytes.
An age and gender-matched cohort of THAs performed for non-traumatic osteoarthritis (OA) or avascular necrosis (AVN) (n = 98) were used to compare complications and patient-reported outcome measures (PROMs).
Our systematic review investigates whether THAs for acetabular fractures should be performed acutely, with a short delay, or as a late procedure for posttraumatic osteoarthritis (PTOA) if it develops.
In a retrospective analysis of over 1000 MIS THAs from our institutional joint registry, operative time, complication rates, patient reported outcome measures (Western Ontario and McMaster Universities Arthritis Index [WOMAC] and Euro-Qol 5D-5L [EQ-5D]) within the first year and responder rates for positive outcome as defined by the Outcome Measures in Rheumatology and Osteoarthritis Research Society International consensus responder (OMERACT-OARSI) criteria were compared between trainee and senior surgeons.
To determine corneal topography parameters of myopia in Chinese and help for studies of causes of myopia, distingiush other corneal diseases (such as early keratoconus), further explore the accurateness and safeness of the clinical effects of radil keratotomy (RK) or photorefractive keratectomy (PRK).
Markedly reduced ecto-5'-nucleotidase activity was found in peripheral blood lymphocytes from 27 out of 30 homosexual men with the acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) in association with Kaposi's sarcoma (AIDS-KS; 2.67 +/- 1.70 U/10(6) cells; n = 13), opportunistic infections (AIDS-OI; 9.29 +/- 7.32; n = 7), or the AIDS-related complex (ARC; 9.82 +/- 6.12; n = 10).
This study aimed to determine circulating levels of polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs), secretory phospholipase A2 (sPLA2), lipoprotein lipase (LPL) and measure circulating protein levels of angiopoietin-like protein 3 (ANGPTL3), ANGPTL4, cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) and prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) in patients with acne vulgaris.
We identified patient-specific genetic alterations in candidate driving genes: RASA2 and NF1 (prostate cancer), TP53 and CDKN2C (olfactory neuroblastoma), FAT1, NOTCH1, and SMAD4 (head and neck cancer), KRAS (urachal carcinoma), EML4-ALK (lung cancer), and MDM2 and PTEN (liposarcoma).
However, these profiles did not segregate by histology (lung adenocarcinoma-appendiceal cancer (KRAS G12D and GNAS R201C), and lung adenocarcinoma-liposarcoma (CDK4 and MDM2 amplification pairs)).
We report that FUS-CHOP, a hallmark fusion gene in mixoid liposarcoma (MLS), has an instructive role in lineage commitment, and its expression in hMSC sequentially immortalized/transformed with up to five oncogenic hits (p53 and Rb deficiency, hTERT over-expression, c-myc stabilization, and H-RAS(v12) mutation) drives the formation of serially transplantable MLS.
TSLP, IL-25, and IL-33 concentrations were measured in bronchoalveolar lavage fluids obtained from normal controls (NCs; n = 40) and from patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF; n = 100), non-specific interstitial pneumonia (NSIP; n = 22), hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP; n = 20), and sarcoidosis (n = 19).
The TSLP and IL-33 levels were significantly higher in patients with IPF relative to the NCs (p = 0.01 and p = 0.0001, respectively), NSIP (p = 4.95E - 7 and p = 0.0002, respectively), HP (p = 0.00003 and p = 0.000005, respectively), and sarcoidosis groups (p = 0.003 and p = 0.0001, respectively).
Recently, thymic stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP), which is well studied in allergic diseases, has been reported in fibrotic diseases, including idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis and atopic dermatitis fibrosis.
Thymic stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP) has been found at high levels in patients with asthma and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, and TSLP has been proposed as a primary driver of lung fibrotic disease.
In addition, in a model of influenza-induced exacerbation of atopic airway inflammation, the absence of TSLPR signaling also led to exaggerated neutrophilic inflammation.
In this study, we demonstrate that influenza infection induces the early expression of TSLP by lung epithelial cells with multiple consequences.
The aim of this study was to examine whether TSLP may be involved in the pathogenesis of a proto-typical fibrotic disease, idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF).
We have previously reported that human CAP10-like protein 46 kDa (hCLP46) is overexpressed in human acute myelogenous leukemia, T acute lymphoblastic leukemia, and leukemia cell lines.
Protein O-glucosyltransferase 1 (POGLUT1) is a novel gene that was initially isolated and identified from the bone marrow cells of patients with myelodysplastic syndrome/acute myeloid leukemia.
We showed that lack of hCLP46 results in impaired ligand induced Notch activation in mammalian cell, and hCLP46 regulates the proliferation of U937 cell through CDKI-RB signaling pathway, which may be important for the pathogenesis of leukemia.
We earlier identified a novel gene human CAP10-like protein 46 KD (hCLP46) from human acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) transformed from myelodysplastic syndrome CD34(+) cells, but the function of this gene remains unclear.
In this study, a real-time polymerase chain reaction-based assay was developed to quantify expression of hCLP46 in the peripheral blood of AML and T-acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) primary samples and in six leukemic cell lines.
A novel human gene, named as human CAP10-like protein 46 kDa (hCLP46), was isolated and identified from human acute myeloid leukemia transformed from myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS-AML) CD34(+) cells.
In vivo, RGC-32-/- mice display an attenuated experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis phenotype accompanied by decreased CNS inflammation and reduced frequency of IL-17- and GM-CSF-producing CD4+ T cells.
Collectively, our results identify RGC-32 as a novel regulator of Th17 cell differentiation in vitro and in vivo and suggest that RGC-32 is a potential therapeutic target in multiple sclerosis and other Th17-mediated autoimmune diseases.
qRT-PCR confirmed the changes of six lncRNAs (RP11-517C16.2-001, FR271872, LOC283352, RP11-401E9.3, FGFR3P, and XXbac-BPG16N22.5) and nine mRNAs (NOS2, C13orf15, FOS, FCN2, SPINT1, PLAC8, BIRC5, NOS2, and COL19A1).
We investigated the combined roles of Response Gene to Complement 32 (RGC-32), FasL, CDC2, AKT, and IL-21 as possible biomarkers of relapse and response to glatiramer acetate (GA) treatment in relapsing-remitting MS (RRMS) patients.
The development of psoriatic-like lesions is attributable to 1) the spontaneously tuning up of psoriasis signatures in keratinocytes through JNK pathway; and 2) neutrophil accumulation caused by the enhanced leukocyte-recruiting capacity associated with overexpression of S100A7-9 and CXCL-1, 8 in keratinocytes with impaired galectin-3 expression.
CXCL1 was associated with atopic dermatitis, a highly pruritic skin disease, but it is not clear what is its mechanism of action, while for CXCL2 there are no data about an association with itch sensitivity.
Hypothesizing that the IL-22/IL-22BP expression ratio reflects the level of bioactive IL-22 in psoriasis skin, we found positive correlations with the expression of IL-22-inducible molecules (IL-20, IL-24, IL-36Gamma, CXCL1, and BD2) in keratinocytes.
UVB irradiation inhibits IL-17A/TNF-Alfa-induced IL-6, IL-8, and CXCL-1 production in HDFs by decreasing the expression of IL-17RA and IL-17RC on fibroblasts through TGF-Beta1/Smad3 signaling pathway, which reveals a new mechanism of the therapeutic action of UVB on psoriasis.
Increased IL-4 expression in human colorectal cancer tissue and growth of colon cancer cell lines implied that IL-4-induced Stat6-mediated tumorigenic signaling likely contributes to intestinal tumor progression in ApcMin/+ mice.
ALDH, aldehyde dehydrogenase; APC, antigen-presenting cells; APM, antigen-processing machinery; CAR: chimeric antigen receptor; CHK1, checkpoint serine/threonine protein kinase; CIC, cancer-initiating cell; CRC, colorectal cancer; CTLA-4, cytotoxic T lymphocyte antigen-4; GBM, glioblastoma multiforme; GDF-15, growth differentiation factor-15; CSPG4: chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan-4; IFN, interferon; IL-4, interleukin-4; IL-10, interleukin-10; IL-13, interleukin-13; IL-13Alfa2, Alfa2 chain of IL-13 receptor; mAb, monoclonal antibody; MDSC, myeloid-derived suppressor cell; MHC, major histocompatibility complex; PD-1, programmed death-1; PD-L1 programmed death ligand-1; PDK, 3-phosphoinositide-dependent protein kinase-1; PGE2, prostaglandin E2; STAT3, signal transducer and activator of transcription 3; TGFB-1, transforming growth factor beta-1; Treg, T regulatory cell.
A few studies suggested that matrix metalloproteinase 1 (MMP-1) rs1799750 polymorphism was associated with nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) risk.
However, the contribution of MMP1 genotype to hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has not been well studied.
M3 muscarinic receptor (M3R) expression is increased in colon cancer; M3R activation stimulates colon cancer cell invasion via cross-talk with epidermal growth factor receptors (EGFR), post-EGFR activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) extracellular signal-related kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2), and induction of matrix metalloproteinase-1 (MMP1) expression.
Collectively, these studies uncover novel functional interactions between post-muscarinic receptor signaling pathways that augment MMP1 expression and drive colon cancer cell invasion; targeting these potentiating interactions has therapeutic potential.
HAS2 is one of the key regulators responsible for CAF-mediated OSCC progression and acts by modulating the balance of MMP1 and TIMP1.
It was further demonstrated that olomoucine blocks SpH2B and SpH1 phosphorylation.
We found that olomoucine blocks SpH1 and SpH2B phosphorylation and inhibits male pronucleus decondensation in vivo.
From these results, it also emerges that the phosphorylation of SpH2B and SpH1 is not required for the degradation of the SpH that is concurrent to male chromatin remodeling.
In T. niger, as well as in P. angulosus, a single form of SpH1 and SpH2A were found.
From the results obtained, it emerged that histone SpH2A was the more closely related protein between these two species, followed by histone SpH1.
At intermediate stages of male pronucleus formation, sperm-derived chromatin is composed of hybrid nucleoprotein particles formed by sperm H1 (SpH1), dimers of sperm H2A-H2B (SpH2A-SpH2B), and a subset of maternal cleavage stage (CS) histone variants.
At this stage in vivo, the CS histone variants are poly(ADP-ribosylated), while SpH2B and SpH1 are phosphorylated.
Consequently, we have investigated the phosphorylation state of SpH1 and SpH2B in relation to the possible protection of these proteins from proteolytic degradation.
The phosphorylated forms of SpH1 and SpH2B were found to remain unaltered, while the nonphosphorylated forms were degraded.
On the basis of this result, we postulate a novel role for the phosphorylation of SpH1 and SpH2B that occurs in vivo after fertilization, namely to protect these histones against degradation at intermediate stages of male chromatin remodeling.
The disappearance of SpH is not coincidental for the five histone classes: SpH4 and SpH3 are lost 5-15 min post insemination (p.i.
), SpH2B and SpH2A disappear 20-40 min p.i., and SpH1 is progressively diminished up to 30 min p.i.
We report a case of adult polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) with end stage renal disease and episodes of fever and cervical lymphadenopathy.
Use of the focused approach resulted in fewer false-positive diagnoses, but five malignant tumors of the breast, 88 lung infiltrates, 43 cases of adenopathy, two cases of polycystic kidney disease, one breast abscess, and one case of splenic flexure diverticulitis were missed.
Heritable disorders of connective tissue (marfan syndrome, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, adult polycystic kidney disease, floppy mitral valve/mitral valve prolapse); congenital heart disease (bicuspid aortic valve); inflammatory/immunologic disorders (rheumatic fever, AIDS, Kawasaki disease, syphilis, seronegative spondyloarthropathies, systemic lupus erythematosus, antiphospholipid syndrome); endocardial disorders (nonbacteremic thrombotic endocarditis, infective endocarditis, endomyocardial fibroelastosis); myocardial dysfunction (ischemic heart disease, dilated cardiomyopathy, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy); diseases and disorders of other organs (chronic renal failure, carcinoid heart disease); aging (calcific aortic stenosis, mitral annular calcification); postinterventional valvular disease; drugs and physical agents are all clinical entities associated with VHD.
The animal models of chronic gastritis in rats were established, and the surface damage of gastric mucosa was observed by gross anatomy; the changes of gastric mucosal tissue and surface morphology were observed by pathological sections of gastric mucosal tissues; the expressions of heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) and nuclear factor E2-related factor 2 (Nrf-2) proteins of gastric mucosal tissues in each group were detected by western blot analysis; the activities of superoxide dismutase (SOD) and catalase (CAT) as well as the contents of reduced glutathione (GSH) and malondialdehyde (MDA) in gastric mucosal tissues were detected by kits.
RE control rats exhibited the down-regulation of antioxidant-related proteins, such as nuclear factor-erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) and heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) expression levels, in the presence of esophagitis; however, the levels with Rhei Rhizoma treatment were significantly higher than those in RE control rats.
Genetic ablation of hmox-1 in H. pylori-infected mice increased histologic gastritis, which was associated with enhanced M1/Th1/Th17 responses, decreased regulatory macrophage (Mreg) response, and reduced H. pylori colonization.
More rarely, germline mutations predisposing to pituitary adenomas -as part of a syndrome (eg, MEN1 or Carney complex), or isolated to the pituitary (AIP or GPR101) can be identified.
Particularly, the variants of GPR101, GPR161, and GPR88 are related to the genetic diseases: growth hormone-secreting pituitary adenoma 2, pituitary stalk interruption syndrome (not confirmed), and childhood-onset chorea with psychomotor retardation, respectively.
In addition to mutations or deletions, copy number variation at the GPR101 locus may also lead to mixed GH and prolactin secreting pituitary adenomas in the setting of X-linked acrogigantism (X-LAG syndrome).
In this review, we summarise the published evidence on XLAG and GPR101 and discuss the results of recent studies that have investigated the potential role of GPR101 variants in the pathogenesis of pituitary adenomas.
It has been suggested that medulloblastomas be categorized into 4 distinct molecular subgroups- WNT (DKK1), SHH (SFRP1), Group 3 (NPR3), or Group 4 (KCNA1)-since each subgroup is distinct and there is no overlap.
Immunohistochemistry for DKK1 (WNT), SFRP1 (SHH), NPR3 (group C), and KCNA1 (group D) could reliably and uniquely classify formalin-fixed medulloblastomas in approximately 98% of patients.
We examined DKK1 expression in primary medulloblastoma cells and patient samples by reverse transcriptase PCR and found it to be significantly down-regulated relative to normal cerebellum.
Transfection of a DKK1 gene construct into D283 cell lines suppressed medulloblastoma tumor growth in colony focus assays by 60% (P &lt; 0.001).
In addition, adenoviral vector-mediated expression of DKK1 in medulloblastoma cells increased apoptosis fourfold (P &lt; 0.001).
These data reveal that inappropriate histone modifications might deregulate DKK1 expression in medulloblastoma tumorigenesis and block its tumor-suppressive activity.
Gene profiling analyses identified several deregulated genes reported as being also deregulated in psoriasis skin in vivo (S100A12, IL-8, DEFB4A and KYNU).
However, in patients with chronic inflammatory skin disease, such as psoriasis and atopic dermatitis (AD), another tryptophan metabolism enzyme downstream of IDO, L-kynureninase (KYNU), is heavily upregulated.
The role of KYNU has not been explored in patients with these skin diseases or in general human immunology.
We sought to explore the expression and potential immunologic function of the tryptophan metabolism enzyme KYNU in inflammatory skin disease and its potential contribution to general human immunology.
KYNU expression positively correlates with disease severity and inflammation and is reduced on successful treatment of psoriasis or AD.
Recently, global CpG methylation changes have been identified in psoriatic skin in comparison to normal skin, particularly near genes known to be upregulated in psoriasis such as KYNU, OAS2, and SERPINB3.
Sites with inverse correlations between methylation and nearby gene expression include those of KYNU, OAS2, S100A12, and SERPINB3, whose strong transcriptional upregulation is an important discriminator of psoriasis.
KCNJ2 gain-of-function mutations V93I and D172N associate with increased IK1, short QT syndrome type 3 and congenital atrial fibrillation.
Gain-of-function mutations in KCNJ2-encoded Kir2.1 channels underlie variant 3 (SQT3) of the short QT syndrome, which is associated with atrial fibrillation (AF).
Mutations of Kir2.1, such as D172N or E299V, inducing gain-of-function, can cause type3 short QT syndrome (SQT3) due to the enlarged outward currents.
Methods In this context, a search was undertaken for mutations in LMNA, encoding Lamins A/C, and ZMPSTE24, LBR, LMNB1, LMNB2, MAN1, SYNE1a and LAP2, encoding Lamins A/C molecular partners, in a Caucasian woman affected with Reynolds syndrome, a particular nosologic entity specifically associating limited cutaneous SSc and primary biliary cirrhosis.
In particular, lamin B1 may be considered as a marker for cirrhosis, because its expression level changes considerably in cirrhotic tissue compared with normal tissue.
A cross-sectional study of anti-lamin B1 autoantibodies, as measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay using human recombinant lamin B1 autoantigen, was performed on serum samples obtained at first evaluation of 238 consecutive French Canadian adults: 61 healthy control subjects, 20 patients with osteoarthritis, 22 with ankylosing spondylitis, 11 with autoimmune hepatitis, 30 with rheumatoid arthritis, and 94 with SLE.
EGR3 is considered as a potential candidate gene for schizophrenia.
We conducted in vitro DNA methylation reaction, Lucia luciferase activity assay, and pyrosequencing assay to assess the DNA methylation of the EGR3 expression underlying the pathophysiology of schizophrenia.
Our data suggest that DNA methylation regulated the expression of EGR3 might not be associated with schizophrenia.
Accordingly, variations in the immediate early gene EGR3, and its target ARC, should influence schizophrenia susceptibility.
In the EU group of 386 schizophrenia cases and 150 controls EGR3 SNP rs1877670 and ARC SNP rs35900184 showed significant associations (p = 0.0078 and p = 0.0275, respectively).
These findings support previously reported associations between EGR3 and schizophrenia.
In this study, we aimed to investigate the white matter connection in schizophrenia susceptible brain regions of early growth response factor 3 (EGR3) expressing rats.
A rat model of schizophrenia was created by the transfection of the EGR3 gene into rat hippocampus.
The volume of hippocampus and the number of fiber bundles were reduced in EGR3 transgenic schizophrenia rats, and are the most sensitive indicators in schizophrenia.
In this study, we successfully created a rat model of schizophrenia by the transfection of EGR3 gene into rat brain.
The transcription factor early growth response protein 3 (EGR3) is involved in schizophrenia.
We developed a putative rat model of schizophrenia by transfecting lentiviral particles carrying the Egr3 gene into bilateral hippocampal dentate gyrus.
This study is the first to report evaluation of brain metabolites using 3.0 T proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy in rats transfected with Egr3, and reveals metabolic abnormalities in the hippocampus and thalamus in this putative model of schizophrenia.
The early growth response 3 (EGR3) gene is an immediate early gene that is expressed throughout the brain and has been suggested as a potential susceptibility gene for schizophrenia (SZ).
The immediate-early gene early growth response 3 (Egr3) is associated with schizophrenia and expressed at reduced levels in postmortem patients' brains.
We have previously reported that Egr3-deficient (Egr3(-/-)) mice display reduced sensitivity to the sedating effects of clozapine compared with wild-type (WT) littermates, paralleling the heightened tolerance of schizophrenia patients to antipsychotic side effects.
Moreover, as the deficit in cortical 5HT(2A)R in Egr3(-/-) mice aligns with numerous studies reporting decreased 5HT(2A)R levels in the brains of schizophrenia patients, and the gene encoding the 5HT(2A)R is itself a leading schizophrenia candidate gene, these findings suggest a potential mechanism by which putative dysfunction in EGR3 in humans may influence risk for schizophrenia.
Previous studies showed that EGR3 gene located in chromosome 8p21.3 was involved in the etiology of schizophrenia.
Overall, the results suggested that EGR3 gene may play an important role in schizophrenia susceptibility in the Han Chinese population, and further functional exploration of the EGR3 gene will contribute to the underlying molecular mechanism for schizophrenia pathogenesis.
The early growth response 3 (EGR3) gene located in chromosome 8p21.3 was also found to be involved in the etiology of schizophrenia.
To investigate the genetic role of EGR3 in Chinese patients, we genotyped four SNPs (average interval ~2.3 kb) in the chromosome region of EGR3 in 470 Chinese schizophrenia patients and 480 healthy control subjects.
In summary, our study supports the association of EGR3 with schizophrenia in our Han Chinese sample, and further functional exploration of the EGR3 gene will contribute to the molecular basis for the complex network underlying schizophrenia pathogenesis.
Serum xylosyltransferase I (XT-I) is a marker for the determination of tissue remodeling in systemic sclerosis.
Since PEComa is associated with upregulation of mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway which controls Glut-1 (glucose transporter) function, increased (18)F-fluorodeoxyglucose ((18)F-FDG) uptake may indicate the over activation of mTOR pathway and may guide selectively inhibiting mTOR pathway treatment.
We report a malignant PEComa patient who presented for (18)F-FDG positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) restaging.
Therefore, (18)F-FDG PET/CT is helpful in restaging and guiding treatment for malignant PEComa with mTOR inhibitors.
We present a case of a 40-year old patient who was incidentally diagnosed of a uterine PEComa and serial studies of PET-CT with FDG were performed for staging and therapeutic response assessment.
This pilot study suggests that FDG-PET scans are negative in patients with benign PEComas and therefore are not likely to be useful for estimating the burden of disease in patients with TSC or LAM, but that FDG-PET scans can be used to identify or exclude other neoplasms in these patients.
Complete deficiency of hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase (HPRT) activity causes Lesch Nyhan disease (LND), characterized by hyperuricemia, severe action dystonia, choreoathetosis, ballismus, cognitive and attention deficit and self-injurious behavior.
The current investigation also identified an unexpected and unique behavior of the knee in children with dystonic cerebral palsy (CP) that was noticed while administering the Pendulum Knee Drop test (PKD) at approximately 0.4 rad (a mid-angle between full extension and zero vertical).
Gprt also showed slightly stronger correlations than Hprt with 13 of 14 measures of the clinical phenotype, including the severity of dystonia, cognitive impairment, and behavioral abnormalities.
To observe the effect of garlicin on adhension molecules CD11a and deformability of peripheral neutrophil in patients with acute cerebral infarction (ACI).
We examined in 19 subjects with acute ischaemic stroke (AIS) the PMN integrin pattern (CD11a, CD11b, CD11c, CD18), using indirect immunofluorescence and adopting a flow cytometer, at baseline and during activation, prolonged for 5 and 15 min, with 4-phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA).
We report, here, the establishment of an in vitro lung             cancer microenvironment by co-incubation of seminaphtharhodafluor (SNARF) labeled             Lewis lung cancer (LLC) cells, carboxyfluorescein succinimidyl ester (CFSE) labeled             fibroblasts and 4-chloromethyl-7-hydroxycoumarin (CMHC) labeled DCs.
Blasts from 38 children with acute leukemia (31 with ALL and 7 with AML) were tested for apoptotic index (Annexin V) and intracellular pH (SNARF).
In congenital heart block association with HLA-B27 and HLA-DR3 is a possible prerequisite in the pathophysiology of the disease, although transplacental passage of various antibodies and immune complexes is widely recognized.
The occurrence of complete congenital heart block has been shown to be associated with the presence of SS-A/Ro antibodies as well as the MHC-haplotype DR3.
We identified 16 miRNAs for colon and 17 miRNAs for rectal carcinoma that appear to differentiate between carcinoma and normal mucosa; of these, 12 were important for both colon and rectal cancer, hsa-miR-663b, hsa-miR-4539, hsa-miR-17-5p, hsa-miR-20a-5p, hsa-miR-21-5p, hsa-miR-4506, hsa-miR-92a-3p, hsa-miR-93-5p, hsa-miR-145-5p, hsa-miR-3651, hsa-miR-378a-3p, and hsa-miR-378i.
We confirmed that Sp1 is overexpressed in castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) cells.
The finding of an ERE overlapping with the Sp1-binding site affected by SNP285, taken together with the significant impact of SNP285 on the risk of breast, ovarian and now endometrial cancer but not prostatic cancer, suggests a gender specific effect of SNP285C on cancer risk.
Taken together, our results demonstrate that a key event in the artemisinin anti-proliferative effects in prostate cancer cells is the transcriptional down-regulation of CDK4 expression by disruption of Sp1 interactions with the CDK4 promoter.
Recently, miR-33b has been reported to be involved in multiple types of human cancer, including hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
To investigate the expression of miR-33b in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and to explore regulatory mechanism of miR-33b for cell proliferation of HCC.
#目#的#：#探#索#微#小RNA-33b(micro RNA-33b, miR-33b)#在#肝#细#胞#癌(hepatocellular carcinoma, HCC)#中#的#表#达#及#调#控HCC#细#胞#增#殖#的#相#关#分#子#机#制#。#方#法#：#收#集#配#对#的HCC#及#癌#旁#组#织32#对, #分#别#采#用#实#时#荧#光#定#量 PCR#和Western#印#迹#法#检#测#人#类#婆#罗#双#树#样#基#因4(Sal-like 4, SALL4)RNA#和#蛋#白#表#达,  MTT#实#验#检#测HCC#细#胞#增#殖, #萤#光#素#酶#报#告#基#因#检#测#验#证miR-33b#与SALL4#基#因#的#靶#点#关#系#。#结#果#：MiR-33b#在HCC#组#织#中#的#表#达#显#著#低#于#癌#旁#组#织(P&lt;0.001)#。#过#表#达miR-33b#能#显#著#降#低HCC LH86#细#胞#的#增#殖#。SALL4#是miR-33b#的#靶#基#因, #其#蛋#白#表#达#被miR-33b#负#调#控#。#过#表#达SALL4#能#逆#转miR-33b#对LH86#细#胞#增#殖#的#抑#制#作#用#。SALL4#在HCC#组#织#中#的#表#达#显#著#高#于#癌#旁#组#织(P&lt;0.001)#。#结#论#：MiR-33b#对HCC#细#胞#增#殖#的#抑#制#作#用#是#通#过#负#调#控SALL4#的#表#达#而#实#现#。.
Analysis using a Cox proportional hazard regression model showed that MAPK8IP1 and SH3GLB1, two autophagy-related genes, were associated with the prognostic signature for glioma.
Glioma patients from the CGGA batches 1 and 2, GSE4412 and TCGA datasets could be divided into high- and low-risk groups with different survival times based on levels of MAPK8IP1 and SH3GLB1 expression.
MAPK8IP1 overexpression and SH3GLB1 knockdown inhibited glioma cell proliferation, migration and invasion, and improved Temozolomide sensitivity.
These findings suggest autophagy-related genes like MAPK8IP1 and SH3GLB1 could be potential therapeutic targets in glioma.
In the present study, we demonstrated that endophilin B1 expression was inhibited and EGFR expression was significantly increased in prostate cancer cell lines.
Endophilin B1 decreased also sustained EGFR downstream signaling such as Erk1/2 phosphorylation in response to EGF stimulation and promoted prostate cancer cell proliferation which is EGF independent.
Our data indicated that endophilin B1 mediated the biological function of EGFR in cancer cell proliferation through regulating the EGFR endocytic trafficking and downstream signaling.
Dominant overexpression of Sh3glb1, Tm4sf1 or Csf1 in chromosome 3 of TCs is mainly associated with tumour promotion in lung cancer, while most down-expression of Pde5 may be involved in the development of pulmonary fibrosis and other acute and chronic interstitial lung disease.
We have recently reported that SH3GLB1/Bif-1 functions as a haploinsufficient tumor suppressor to prevent the acquisition of apoptosis resistance and malignant transformation during Myc-driven lymphomagenesis.
Notably, we found that Sh3glb1 haploinsufficiency increases mitochondrial mass in overproliferated prelymphomatous Emy-Myc cells.
In the present study, we report that Bif-1 (Sh3glb1), a gene encoding a membrane curvature-driving endophilin protein, is a haploinsufficient tumor suppressor that plays a key role in the prevention of chromosomal instability and suppresses the acquisition of apoptosis resistance during Myc-driven lymphomagenesis.
Although a large portion of Bif-1-deficient mice harboring an Emy-Myc transgene displayed embryonic lethality, allelic loss of Bif-1 dramatically accelerated the onset of Myc-induced lymphoma.
Consistently, allelic loss of Bif-1 suppressed the activation of caspase-3 in Myc-induced lymphoma cells.
With the use of tissue microarrays comprising 50 matched cases of invasive and metastatic lesions, the expression profiles of SH3GLB1 and SUB1, SND1, TRIM28 were validated to be down- and up-regulated, respectively, during clinical progression of carcinoma in situ to invasive and metastatic carcinomas.
The human aminopeptidase XPNPEP3 is associated with cystic kidney disease and TNF-TNFR2 cellular signaling.
High circulating levels of soluble tumor necrosis factor receptors (TNFRs: TNFR1, TNFR2) predict renal function decline in a variety of kidney diseases.
Analyses carried out by broadening the panic disorder phenotype to include agoraphobia continued to support linkage to ADORA2A.
Our findings provide evidence for a susceptibility locus for panic disorder, and possibly including agoraphobia, either within the ADORA2A gene or in a nearby region of chromosome 22, and serves as the first successful candidate gene replication study in panic disorder.
Although MUC13, a transmembrane mucin, is aberrantly expressed in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) and generally correlates with increased expression of HER2, the underlying mechanism remains poorly understood.
However, to date, we still have no outlined knowledges about the pharmacological effects of TSG, though the role of TSG in aging and Alzheimer's disease has been reviewed in recent years.
2,3,4',5-tetrahydroxystilbene 2-O-Beta-D-glucoside (TSG), a monomer of stilbene from polygonummultiflorum, exerts neuroprotection in a range of experimental models such as Alzheimer's disease and brain ischemia.
The efficacy of 2, 3, 5, 4'-tetrahydroxystilbene-2-O-Beta-D-glucoside (TSG) treatment on cognitive decline in individuals with Alzheimer's disease (AD) has not been investigated.
As erythropoietin cannot freely cross the blood-brain barrier, we tested EH-201 (2,3,5,4'-tetrahydroxystilbene-2-O-Beta-d-glucoside, also known as TSG), a low MW inducer of erythropoietin, for its therapeutic effects on memory impairment in models of neurodegenerative diseases, physiological ageing or brain injury.
This study was aimed to investigate the potential neuroprotective effect of TSG in 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropypridine (MPTP)-treated mouse model of Parkinson's disease (PD).
The aim of this study was to evaluate the protective effects of 2,3,5,4'-tetrahydroxystilbene-2-O-Beta-D-glucoside (TSG), an active component extracted from Polygonum multiflorum, on learning/memory deficits in Alzheimer's disease (AD).
To investigate the mRNA and protein alterations of Alfa-synuclein in the brain of Alzheimer's disease-like mouse model at the different ages, and to evaluate the effects of 2,3,5,4'-tetrahydroxy stilbene-2-O-Beta-D-glucoside (TSG) on Alfa-synuclein expression.
TSG may have potential to the prevention and treatment of Alzheimer's diseases.
Familial tumoral calcinosis (FTC)/hyperostosis-hyperphosphatemia syndrome (HHS) is a rare disorder caused by mutations in the genes encoding fibroblast growth factor-23 (FGF23), N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase 3 (GALNT3), or KLOTHO.
Mutations of any of FGF23, Klotho or GALnT3 genes can lead to a syndrome characterized by hyperphosphatemia, ectopic calcifications and recurrent long bone lesions with hyperostosis.
The EAD amplitude (EADA) in the dauricine group (26% +/- 9% of MAPA) was smaller than that in the control group (52% +/- 5% of MAPA, P &lt; 0.05) and the incidence of arrhythmias in dauricine group (28%) was lower than that in control group (80%, P &lt; 0.05).
The pre-dietary rehabilitation levels of acute phase proteins (APP) namely, alpha-1-antitrypsin (AAT), orosomucoid (ORO), haptoglobin (HAP), fibrinogen (FIB) and C-reactive protein (CRP) in the plasma of Sudanese children with severe protein energy malnutrition (PEM) were compared with those of normal controls, and with the levels after dietary rehabilitation.
A commercially available radial immunodiffusion assay was used to measure serum and faecal alpha 1-antitrypsin concentrations as well as alpha 1-antitrypsin clearance in 17 children with kwashiorkor, 11 children with marasmic kwashiorkor, 10 children with marasmus, and 16 normal children.
Serum alpha 1-antitrypsin concentrations were significantly higher than normal in the marasmus and marasmic kwashiorkor groups, and significantly lower than normal in the kwashiorkor group.
The intestinal clearance of alpha 1-antitrypsin was significantly higher than normal in the marasmus and marasmic kwashiorkor groups, and significantly lower than normal in the kwashiorkor group.
There was a significant inverse correlation between the alpha 1-antitrypsin clearance and serum albumin concentration in the marasmus and marasmic kwashiorkor groups.
The concentrations of serum protein albumin, prealbumin and transferrin were determined in twenty-eight cases of protein-energy malnutrition (PEM) with infection, together with the levels of serum proteinase inhibitors (PI), alpha1-antitrypsin (AT), alpha1-antichymotrypsin (Ach), alpha2-macroglobulin (alpha2M) and inter-alpha-trypsin inhibitor (IalphaI).
Compared to the control, cirrhosis group demonstrated lower mRNA levels of OATP1 (0.038 +/- 0.020 vs. 0.232 +/- 0.0979; p = 0.004), MRP2 (0.201 +/- 0.084 vs. 0.7567 +/- 0.254; p = 0.002), and OATP1/MRP2 mRNA ratio (0.193 +/- 0.065 vs. 0.342 +/- 0.206; p = 0.032).
In the cirrhosis group, there was an inverse correlation between the ratios of OATP1/MRP2 mRNA and DSR (R = -0.709, p = 0.01).
In the present study, we investigated the WIF1 expression level by immuno-histochemical staining and semi-quantitative RT-PCR in normal oral, OSF and OSCC tissues, as well as the methylation status by methylation-specific PCR and bisulfite genomic sequencing.
The results showed that WIF1 was readily expressed in normal oral mucous tissues, but decreased gradually in OSF early, moderately advanced and advanced tissues, and was less expressed in OSCC tissues.
Moreover, WIF1 was able to translocate from the nuclear to cytoplasm in OSF and OSCC tissues.
Furthermore, WIF1 was frequently methylated in OSCC cases with betel quid chewing habit, but not in normal oral mucous and different stages of OSF tissues, suggesting WIF1 methylation is tumor-specific in the development of OSF.
Thus, the results demonstrated that WIF1 is frequently downregulated or silenced by promoter methylation in the carcinogenesis of OSF, which serves as a potential epigenetic biomarker for the early detection of OSCC.
Here we report for the first time that downregulation of the Wnt inhibitory factor 1 (WIF1) is a widespread event in salivary gland carcinoma ex-pleomorphic adenoma (CaExPA).
Most importantly, WIF1 significantly diminished the number of salivary gland cancer stem cells and the anchorage-independent cell growth.
Antagomir and miRNA-mimic transfections in neuroblastoma cell lines confirmed that DKK3 secretion to the culture media is regulated by mir-92.
We showed that the repressor REST inhibits the activity of the miR-9-2 promoter in undifferentiated neuroblastoma cells, whereas REST dismissal and phosphorylation of CREB trigger transcription in differentiating cells.
To explore the effect and molecular mechanism of the unconventional prefoldin RPB5 interactor (URI) in hepatocellular carcinoma HepG2 cells.
In this issue of Cancer Cell, Tummala and colleagues demonstrate that unconventional prefoldin RPB5 interactor (URI) expression in hepatocytes leads to hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) development by interacting with L-tryptophan/kynurenine/nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD(+)) metabolism.
Peginterferon/ribavirin has been the standard-of-care for chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infections: 48 weeks for genotype 1 or 4 (HCV-1/4) and 24 weeks for HCV-2/3.
Our recent studies implicated key and distinct roles for the highly related RalA and RalB small GTPases (82% sequence identity) in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) tumorigenesis and invasive and metastatic growth, respectively.
Our recent studies established essential and distinct roles for RalA and RalB small GTPase activation in K-Ras mutant pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) cell line tumorigencity, invasion, and metastasis.
RalA, RalB, and their major effectors RalBP1 and Sec5 were knocked down by stable expression of short hairpin RNAs in the K-Ras-dependent pancreatic cancer-derived cell line MIA PaCa-2.
In the present study, we determined whether RalA and RalB also had divergent roles in promoting the aberrant growth of pancreatic cancers, which are characterized by the highest occurrence of Ras mutations.
We now show that inhibition of RalA but not RalB expression universally reduced the transformed and tumorigenic growth in a panel of ten genetically diverse human pancreatic cancer cell lines.
Despite the apparent unimportant role of RalB in tumorigenic growth, it was nevertheless critical for invasion in seven of nine pancreatic cancer cell lines and for metastasis as assessed by tail-vein injection of three different tumorigenic cell lines tested.
Moreover, both RalA and RalB were more commonly activated in pancreatic tumor tissue than other Ras effector pathways.
RalA function is critical to tumor initiation, whereas RalB function is more important for tumor metastasis in the tested cell lines and thus argues for critical, but distinct, roles of Ral proteins during the dynamic progression of Ras-driven pancreatic cancers.
The mutations of keratin 1 gene (KRT1) were reported to associate with skin diseases.
We speculate the effects of KRT10 and LHON mutations influence each other-skin inflammatory reaction due to severe ichthyosis might trigger the development of psychoneurological abnormalities whereas the mitochondrial mutation may reduce revertant mosaicism phenomenon resulting in the lack of confetti-like spots characteristic for IWC.
Specific regions of Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) latent episomes are "poised" to be activated by the KSHV replication and transcription activator (K-Rta).
UFS features incomplete urinary bladder emptying and vesicoureteric reflux, with a high risk of recurrent urosepsis and end-stage renal disease.
Non-neurogenic neurogenic bladder (NNNB) has a bladder identical to UFS without typical facial features.
HPSE2 mutations were absent in 23 non-neurogenic neurogenic bladder probands and, of 439 families with nonsyndromic vesicoureteric reflux, only one carried a putative pathogenic HPSE2 variant.
Urofacial syndrome (UFS) (or Ochoa syndrome) is an autosomal-recessive disease characterized by congenital urinary bladder dysfunction, associated with a significant risk of kidney failure, and an abnormal facial expression upon smiling, laughing, and crying.
UFS individuals often have reflux of infected urine from the bladder to the upper renal tract, with a risk of kidney damage and renal failure.
Soluble VEGFC was detected in the plasma and ascites of patients with ovarian carcinoma, and VEGFR3 expression was found in their tumor tissues.
In human ovarian carcinoma xenograft models, high levels of soluble VEGFC in ascites and serum were detected, in association with disease progression, tumor burden, and volume of ascites.
VEGF-A, VEGF-C and PDGF-A may promote lymphatic metastasis in epithelial ovarian carcinoma through else mechanisms other than lymphangiogenesis.
In vitro stimulation of ES2 ovarian carcinoma cells with LH and FSH induced expression of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-C. In vivo, ovariectomy of mice resulted in activation of the VEGF-C promoter in ovarian carcinoma xenografts, increased VEGF-C mRNA level, and enhanced tumor lymphangiogenesis and angiogenesis.
Using immunohistochemistry, we examined maspin, VEGFA, VEGFC, and VEGFD expression in 60 ovarian carcinoma tissues (35 serous papillary carcinomas, 18 endometrioid carcinomas, and 7 primary ovarian mucinous carcinomas).
The aim of the work was to assess vascular endothelial growth factor VEGF-C and vascular endothelial growth factor VEGF-D expression in ovarian carcinomas.
There was strong correlation between expression of VEGF-C and VEGF-D. Conversely, there was no significant correlation between VEGF-C and VEGF-D expression and clinicopathological features of ovarian carcinoma.
The tissue expression levels of VEGF-A, VEGF-C, VEGFR-2, and VEGFR-3 in 80 specimens of ovarian carcinoma were examined immnohistochemically.
High tissue expression of VEGF-C and VEGFR-2 reflects the aggressiveness of the spread of tumor in ovarian carcinoma.
Accordingly, this study attempted to analyze the association between the Her-2/NEU oncogene and VEGF-C in ovarian carcinoma and to elucidate the molecular mechanism of VEGF-C induction by Her-2/NEU.
Immunohistochemistry was used to determine the expression of Her-2/NEU and VEGF-C in tissues from 41 patients with epithelial ovarian carcinoma.
Several Her-2/NEU-stably-transfected Caov-3 ovarian carcinoma cells were used to evaluate the effect of Her-2/NEU on VEGF-C, the possible regulation mechanism, and the biological function of VEGF-C. Our experimental results identified a significant association between the Her-2/NEU oncogene and VEGF-C expression in both epithelial ovarian cancer patients (p &lt; 0.05; Fisher's exact test) and in vitro cell lines.
In conclusion, this work clearly establishes that the Her-2/NEU oncogene is essential for the regulation of VEGF-C in ovarian carcinoma.
We conclude that VEGF-C, VEGF-D and VEGFR-3 play an important role in lymphatic spread and intraperitoneal tumour development in ovarian carcinoma.
Grade 3/4 anorexia, diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, and febrile neutropenia occurred more frequently with CPT-P, whereas grade 3/4 leukopenia, neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, peripheral sensory neuropathy, and joint pain occurred more frequently with TC.
Major adverse reactions were grade 4 neutropenia observed in 37, 54 and 8% of the patients on CPT-P, VDS-P and CPT, respectively; and grades 3 and 4 diarrhoea observed in 12, 3 and 15% of the patients, respectively.
Most of these changes in transporter mRNA levels were also found in epinephrine-exposed human highly-differentiated hepatoma HepaRG cells, which additionally exhibited reduced protein expression of OATP2B1 and MRP3, increased expression of P-glycoprotein and decreased transport activity of NTCP, OATPs and OCT1.
Concomitantly, mRNA expressions of various sinusoidal and canalicular hepatic drug transporters were not detected (NTCP, OATP1B1, organic anion transporter 2 (OAT2), OCT1 and bile salt export pump) or were found to be lower (OATP1B3, OATP2B1, multidrug and toxin extrusion protein 1, BCRP and MRP3) in hepatoma HuH-7 cells than those found in human hepatocytes, whereas other transporters such as OAT7, MRP4 and MRP5 were up-regulated.
Treatment by the reference PKC activator phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) for 48h was shown to decrease mRNA expression of various sinusoidal transporters, including OATP1B1, OATP2B1, NTCP, OCT1 and MRP3, but to increase that of OATP1B3, whereas mRNA expression of canalicular transporters was transiently enhanced (MDR1), decreased (BSEP and MRP2) or unchanged (BCRP) in human hepatoma HepaRG cells.
We present evidence for the first time that ABCC3 is a potential sanguine biomarker and anticancer target in hepatocellular carcinoma.
Accordingly, the ABCC3 protein was preferentially overexpressed within the nodules and tumors during hepatocellular carcinoma progression and was secreted into the bloodstream of rat hepatocarcinogenesis model.
The ABCC3 protein was expressed in human hepatoma cells and, importantly, was also present in HepG2- and Huh7-conditioned media.
Furthermore, ABCC3 was overexpressed in human hepatocellular carcinoma.
This report is the first to describe liver overexpression of Abcc3 during the cancer initiation, promotion, and progression periods in rat hepatocarcinogenesis model and in human hepatocellular carcinoma.
Our patient with HMC and PAP was diagnosed with MKS because she has two typical abnormality of MKS and she has no definite complications of retinal disease, learning disability, obesity and renal failure that develop in Bardet-Biedl syndrome, but not in MKS until 33 months of age.
A 11-year-old, 37 kg, female with Mckusick-Kaufman syndrome, chronic renal failure, hypertensive encephalopathy and severe asthma was scheduled for surgical arterial-venous fistula preparation and removal of infected peritoneal dialysis catheter.
Pre-training, intra-CA1 injection of 5-HT3 receptor agonist Chlorophenylbiguanide (Mchl; 0.01 and 0.001 myg/rat; P &lt; 0.001) and antagonist Y-25130 (0.1 myg/rat; P &lt; 0.001) reduced memory acquisition and did not alter pain response, while higher dose of both drugs increased locomotor activity in normal rats.
Chemo-naive patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) who received carboplatin-based chemotherapy were treated with doublet antiemetic therapy with dexamethasone and a 5-HT3 receptor antagonist during the first cycle of chemotherapy.
Thirty patients with breast cancer, receiving 5HT3 receptor antagonists to prevent emesis during chemotherapy were randomly assigned to the intervention or control group.
Clonal analysis of primary tumor cell cultures of a human sarcomatoid cholangiocarcinoma identified different types of self-propagating sub-clones characterized by stable (keratin-7 positive or keratin-7 negative) phenotypes and an unstable phenotype consisting of mixtures of keratin-7 positive and negative cells, which lack stem cell features but may reversibly switch their phenotypes.
Autopsy revealed cholangiocarcinoma as the primary tumour confirmed by strong CK7 positivity and glypican-3 negativity.
A homozygous missense mutation in TRHR (c.392T &gt; C; p.I131T) was identified in an 8-year-old boy with moderate hypothyroidism (TSH: 2.61 mIU/L, Normal: 0.27 to 4.2; free thyroxine: 9.52 pmol/L, Normal: 10.9 to 25.7) who was overweight (body mass index: 20.4 kg/m2, p91) but had normal stature (122 cm; -0.58 standard deviation).
A unique missense TRHR defect identified in a consanguineous family is associated with central hypothyroidism in homozygotes and hyperthyrotropinemia in heterozygotes, suggesting compensatory elevation of TSH with reduced biopotency.
Isolated congenital central hypothyroidism (CeH) can result from mutations in TRHR, TSHB, and IGSF1, but its etiology often remains unexplained.
Plasma levels of C1q, mannose-binding lectin, C4d, Bb, C3, C3a, C5a and soluble C5b-9 were detected by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay in 222 patients with active biopsy-proven lupus nephritis, 34 patients with lupus nephritis at remission, 82 patients with active systemic lupus erythematosus without renal involvement and 39 normal controls.
The aim of this study was to investigate serum levels of mannose-binding lectin (MBL) in type 1 diabetes with diabetic nephropathy (DN) and persistent normoalbuminuria (PN).
A frameshift mutation on BBS7 gene was detected in No.2 pedigree, the patients of this pedigree combined with central obesity, polydactyly and mental handicap.
Nonsense YAP1 mutations have been shown to co-segregate with autosomal dominantly inherited coloboma.
Therefore, we screened YAP1 for variants in a cohort of 258 undiagnosed UK patients with developmental eye disorders, including anophthalmia, microphthalmia and coloboma.
We identified a novel 1 bp deletion in YAP1 in a boy with bilateral microphthalmia and bilateral chorioretinal coloboma.
Verteporfin, a drug that enhances phototherapy to treat neovascular macular degeneration, is an inhibitor of YAP1.
yap (yap1) mutants lack a subset of RPE cells and/or exhibit coloboma.
Exome sequence analysis of affected individuals from two families with autosomal-dominant inheritance of coloboma identified two different cosegregating heterozygous nonsense mutations (c.370C&gt;T [p.Arg124*] and c. 1066G&gt;T [p.Glu356*]) in YAP1.
We investigated the allelic frequencies of TLR4 (D299G and T399I) and NOD2/CARD15 (R702W, G908R, and L1007finsC) SNPs in 87 asymptomatic serologically H. pylori-positive individuals (Group I), in 63 patients with antrum-predominant gastritis (Group II) and in 60 patients with corpus-predominant gastritis or pangastritis (Group III).
This activates TRPV1 on primary sensory nerves to induce acute pancreatitis.
We found that constitutive genetic TRPV1 deletion or peripheral TRPV1 deletion reduced acetic acid-evoked abdominal constrictions, without affecting referred abdominal hyperalgesia or allodynia in an acute pancreatitis model of visceral pain.
It has been recently demonstrated that transient receptor potential vanilloid 1 (TRPV1) activation causes neurogenic inflammation and plays an important role in acute pancreatitis.
Common pancreaticobiliary duct obstruction causes an increase in pancreatic LTB4 concentrations that in turn mediates activation of TRPV1 resulting in acute pancreatitis.
However, when primary sensory neurons were ablated by injection of the neurotoxin and TRPV1 agonist, resiniferatoxin, pancreatitis was ameliorated in wild-type mice but not in null mice, indicating that nerves bearing TRPV1 are part of the inflammatory pathway in acute pancreatitis because disappearance significantly reduced the inflammatory response.
Nerves expressing TRPV1 participate in the neurogenic inflammation during acute pancreatitis.
Lim-domain only 4 (LMO4) plays a critical role in mediating the ototoxic side-effects of cisplatin, a highly effective anti-cancer drug.
The role of Lmo4 in lung tumorigenesis was measured using a mouse model of lung adenocarcinoma in which the oncogenic K-Ras protein has been knocked into the K-Ras locus.
Finally, we evaluated the expression of LMO4 in tissue microarrays of early stage non-small cell lung cancer and observed that LMO4 is more highly expressed in lung squamous cell carcinoma compared to adenocarcinoma.
LIM-domain only protein 4 (LMO4) is a widely expressed protein with important roles in embryonic development and breast cancer.
A subsequent search of the neuroblastoma gene server for human orthologues of genes differentially expressed in the chick embryo neural crest screen retrieved the LIM domain only protein 4 (LMO4), which was expressed in both cell types analyzed.
Functional experiments in these two model systems revealed that LMO4 activity is required for neuroblastoma cell invasion and neural crest delamination.
Moreover, we identified LMO4 as an essential cofactor in Snail2-mediated cadherin repression and in the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition of both neural crest and neuroblastoma cells.
Together, our results suggest that the association of high levels of LMO4 with aggressive neuroblastomas is dependent on LMO4 regulation of cadherin expression and hence, tumor invasiveness.
LMO4 participates in Stat3 signaling in hepatocytes and associates with histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) in cancer cells.
Because LMO4 is up-regulated in human breast cancers, repression of ERalpha transactivation functions by LMO4 might contribute to the process of breast cancer progression by allowing the development of ERalpha-negative phenotypes, leading to increased aggressiveness of breast cancer cells.
LMO4 belongs to a family of LIM-only transcriptional regulators, the first two members of which are oncoproteins in acute T cell leukemia.
Overexpression of LMO4 mRNA was observed in 5 of 10 human breast cancer cell lines.
We used the 16-mer core sequences of the RRSs in the AAV ITRs and AAVS1 separately as query sequences and identified 18 new RRSs in or flanking the genes coding for the following: tyrosine kinase activator protein 1 (TKA-1); colony stimulating factor-1; insulin-like growth factor binding protein 2 (IGFBP-2); histone H2B.1; basement membrane heparan sulfate proteoglycan, also known as perlecan; the AF-9 gene product, which is involved in the chromosomal translocation t (9:11)(p22:q23); the betaB subunit of the hormone known as inhibin; interleukin-2 enhancer binding factor; an endoplasmic reticulum-Golgi intermediate compartment resident protein called p63; a global transcription activator (hSNF2L); the beta-actin repair domain; a retinoic acid-inducible factor, also known as midkine; a breast tumor autoantigen; a growth-arrest- and DNA-damage-inducible protein called gadd45; the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor called KIP2, which inhibits several G1 cyclin-cyclin-dependent kinase complexes; and the hereditary breast and ovarian cancer gene (BRCA1).
To investigate the role of pregnancy-associated plasma protein A (PAPP-A) in the outcome of ischemic cerebrovascular disease.
We analyzed the levels of PAPP-A in the transient ischemic attack (TIA) patients, ischemic stroke (IS) patients and normal control, and followed up the outcome of the patients in the following 2 years.
Higher PAPP-A concentration has a forecasting value on prognosis in ischemic cerebrovascular disease.
Controlling for age, sex, and classical cardiovascular risk factors, N-terminal section brain natriuretic peptide and pregnancy-associated plasma protein-A were independent emerging cardiovascular risk factors for acute coronary syndrome, but pregnancy-associated plasma protein-A was not for stroke.
The ADMA, hsCRP and PAPP-A can be recommended for including into clinical molecular panel for personalized diagnostic of causes of stroke along with clinical anamnestic data.
The analysis of levels of ADMA, hsCR and PPAPP-A interpreted with regard to clinical anamnestic data can be proposed for enhancing quality of diagnostic of causes of stroke.
This study investigated the correlation of plama levels of inflammatory biomarkers [soluble cluster of differentiation 40 ligand (sCD40L), alpha fetoprotein A (fetuin-A), and pregnancy-associated protein A (PAPP-A)] with carotid plaque in patients with acute ischemic stroke.
Enzyme- linked immunosorbent assay analysis revealed increased levels of serum pregnancy-associated plasma protein-A (PAPP-A) in ischemic cerebrovascular disease patients compared with healthy controls.
Multiple-factor logistic regression analysis on correction of age, gender, history of smoking, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, hypercholesteremia, and ischemic stroke family history showed that the risk for ischemic cerebrovascular disease in the population without the A allele at the A/C genetic locus in exon 14 of the PAPP-A was 2-folds greater than the population expressing the A allele.
These experimental findings suggested that ischemic cerebrovascular disease correlated with the C allele in exon 14 of PAPP-A.
The aim of this study was to examine the prognostic value of serum pregnancy-associated plasma protein A (PAPP-A), S100 and high sensitivity C-reactive protein (hs-CRP) in heparin-naive patients of acute ischemic stroke.
Serum levels of PAPP-A, S100 and hs-CRP were determined in 205 heparin-naive patients of acute ischemic stroke and 50 healthy controls.
Serum PAPP-A level showed a progressive increase with the increase of stroke severity (P&lt;0.05).
Serum PAPP-A, S100 and hs-CRP were associated with stroke severity or outcome after ischemic stroke and may offer complementary information, essential for clinical decision making.
Serum PAPP-A showed a potential value for the evaluation of stroke clinically.
By Cox regression analysis, we assessed the association of baseline levels of PAPP-A with all-cause mortality, combined cardiovascular events and the specific outcomes of sudden death, stroke, myocardial infarction and infectious mortality.
Categorical analyses showed that the patients in the 4(th) PAPP-A quartile had an adjusted 2.6 fold increased risk of sudden death and 2.8 fold increased risk of stroke as compared to the patients in the 1st quartile.
PAPP-A is associated with sudden death, stroke and infectious complications in diabetic dialysis patients.
PAPP-A levels above 34.6 mIU/l in cardiac chest-pain patients sets alarm bells ringing as a warning for higher risk of short-term cardiovascular adverse events, including stent thrombosis, myocardial infarction, ischemic stroke or cardiovascular-related death within 90 days, the combined primary end point of this study.
The aim of this study is to evaluate whether PAPP-A gene polymorphism is associated with the risk of ischemic stroke (IS) in northern Chinese Han populations.
The postoperative course was uneventful for 13 days; however, severe neurologic deterioration remained in the area of the cerebral infarction, due to vasospasm of the internal carotid artery.
In this study, the authors examined the effects of treatment with the NO donor molsidomine with regard to decreasing the incidence of spasm-related delayed brain infarctions and improving clinical outcome in patients with SAH.
Diagnostic tests and imaging are consistent with recent myocardial infarction in the LAD vascular territory because of coronary spasm and cerebral infarction in the middle cerebral artery vascular territory probably related to khat chewing.
Cerebral vasospasm has traditionally been regarded as an important cause of delayed cerebral ischaemia (DCI) which occurs after aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage, and often leads to cerebral infarction and poor neurological outcome.
To assess the clinical efficacy of acupuncture at key acupoints combined with the routine rehabilitation training of limb function on spasmodic hemiplegia after cerebral infarction.
We describe a patient presented with sequential events of hemifacial spasm, cerebral infarction and fatal subarachnoid hemorrhage.
As it is unknown whether STAG2 gene is responsible for the occurrence and associated with the prognosis of acute myeloid leukemia (AML), the present study analyzed the relative expression levels of STAG2 in 127 de novo AML patients and 17 healthy volunteers using reverse transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction.
Rare STAG2 mutations can amplify at the level of GMPs, from which it may drive the transformation to acute myeloid leukemia.
By 1 year most Spnb3(-/-) animals develop a myoclonic seizure disorder with significant reductions of EAAT4, EAAT1, GluRdelta, IP3R, and NCAM140.
Integrating human genetic data with proteomic data showed that Arc-PSD95 complexes are enriched in schizophrenia, intellectual disability, autism, and epilepsy mutations and normal variants in intelligence.
Phosphodiesterase-2A (PDE2A) is a potential therapeutic target for treatment of Alzheimer's disease and pulmonary hypertension.
We propose that transaortic gradient indirectly calculated by using the simplified Gorlin's equation could be an alternative method to assess the severity of aortic stenosis.
In studying PWS-iPSCs and human parthenogenetic iPSCs, we unexpectedly found substantial upregulation of virtually all maternally expressed genes (MEGs) in the imprinted DLK1-DIO3 locus on chromosome 14.
Subsequently, we determined that IPW, a long noncoding RNA in the critical region of the PWS locus, is a regulator of the DLK1-DIO3 region, as its overexpression in PWS and parthenogenetic iPSCs resulted in downregulation of MEGs in this locus.
The imprinted Dlk1-Gtl2 and Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) regions are characterized by a complex noncoding transcription unit spanning arrays of tandemly repeated C/D RNA genes.
Twenty-two HCCs in 19 patients that were difficult to demonstrate on ultrasound (mean tumor diameter was 17.5 mm) were treated with CT-guided RF ablation by caudal-cranial oblique insertion to avoid pneumothorax, using MPR images after transcatheter arterial chemoembolization.
Compared with the conventional procedure, the use of MPR images does not increase the rate of pneumothorax or the procedure time.
To evaluate the utility of multiplanar reconstruction (MPR) image for CT-guided biopsy and determine factors of influencing diagnostic accuracy and the pneumothorax rate.
The use of MPR for CT-guided lung biopsy is useful for improving diagnostic accuracy with no significant increase in pneumothorax rate or total procedure time.
Blocking interactions between NKp46 and its ligand protects mice from STZ-induced diabetes, but differential expression non-diabetic and diabetic donor samples have not been tested.
Obesity drove the upregulation of ligands of the NK cell-activating receptor NCR1 on adipocytes; this stimulated NK cell proliferation and interferon-Gamma (IFN-Gamma) production, which in turn triggered the differentiation of proinflammatory macrophages and promoted insulin resistance.
We previously reported that the NKp46 receptor is involved in the development of type 1 diabetes (T1D).
In the present study, we evaluated the expression and clinical significance of CCR6, CCR7, their ligands and CD4+CD25+Foxp3+ regulatory T cells in laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma (LSCC) and metastatic lymph nodes (LNs).
It was hypothesized that the expression profile of CCR6, CCR7 and the proliferation of CD4+CD25+Foxp3+ Tregs affected the process of LN metastasis in LSCC patients.
To evaluate the expressions of chemokine receptor 6 (CCR6), chemokine receptor 7 (CCR7) and their ligands (CCL20, CCL19/CCL21) in laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma (LSCC), and then explore their correlation with the clinicopathological features of LSCC.
FCM showed the percentage of CD4+ CCR6+ T cells of LSCC was significantly higher than that of normal control (P &lt; 0.05), while that of CD4+ CCR7+ T cells was significantly lower (P &lt; 0.05).
CCR6 and CCR7 are expressed in tumor situ, metastatic LN and PBMC,and might exert a potential role in LSCC development.
To evaluate the expressions and clinical significance of chemokine receptor 6 (CCR6), chemokine receptor 7(CCR7) and CD4(+)CD25(+)Foxp3(+) regulatory T cells (Treg) in laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma (LSCC) and metastatic lymph nodes.
CCR6, CCR7 and Treg could take part in the process of lymph node metastasis in LSCC patients.
This study was designed to observe the expression of CXCR4 and CCR7 in laryngeal carcinoma tissues in order to primitively clarify the relationship between Chemokine Receptor CCR7 and CXCR4 and the malignity of laryngeal carcinoma.
We examined the expression of Chemokine Receptor CXCR4 and CCR7 in 30 cases laryngeal carcinoma tissues (experiment group) and 18 cases normal laryngeal tissues (control group)with immunohistochemistry.
(1) Chemokine Receptor CXCR4 and CCR7 were positively expressed in laryngeal carcinoma tissues while they were negative in the control group.
; (2) Chemokine Receptor CXCR4 and CCR7 expression in laryngeal carcinoma declined with the rise of the differentiation grade of laryngeal carcinoma (P &lt; 0.05).
Chemokine Receptor CXCR4 and CCR7 are highly expressed in laryngeal carcinoma, and their expression were associated with differentiation grade of laryngeal carcinoma, clinical stage and neck lymph node metastasis.
Mutations in a number of genes encoding transcription factors - such as HESX1, SOX2, SOX3, LHX3, LHX4, PROP1, POU1F1, PITX, GLI3, GLI2, OTX2, ARNT2, IGSF1, FGF8, FGFR1, PROKR2, PROK2, CHD7, WDR11, NFKB2, PAX6, TCF7L1, IFT72, GPR161 and CDON - have been associated with pituitary dysfunction and abnormal pituitary gland development; the correlation of genetic mutations to endocrine and MRI phenotypes has improved our knowledge of pituitary development and management of patients with hypopituitarism, both in terms of possible genetic counseling, and of early diagnosis of evolving anterior pituitary hormone deficiencies.
Mutations in the GH1 and GHRHR genes shed light on the phenotype and pathogenesis of IGHD whereas mutations in transcription factors such as HESX1, PROP1, POU1F1, LHX3, LHX4, GLI2 and SOX3 contributed to the understanding of CPHD.
In humans, only 13 heterozygous LHX4 mutations have been associated with congenital hypopituitarism.
The aims of this study were to evaluate the prevalence of LHX4 mutations in patients with hypopituitarism, to define the associated phenotypes, and to characterize the functional impact of the identified variants and the respective role of the 2 LIM domains of LHX4.
We screened 417 unrelated patients with isolated growth hormone deficiency or combined pituitary hormone deficiency associated with ectopic posterior pituitary and/or sella turcica anomalies for LHX4 mutations (Sanger sequencing).
This study, performed in the largest cohort of patients screened so far for LHX4 mutations, describes 6 disease-causing mutations that are responsible for congenital hypopituitarism.
In a subset of 50 patients, re-assessment in adulthood was performed, including GHRH-arginine testing, pituitary magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and mutational screening for the growth hormone-1 gene (GH1) and the GHRH receptor gene (GHRHR) in isolated GHD (IGHD), and HESX1, PROP1, POU1F1, LHX3, LHX4, and GLI2 in multiple pituitary hormone deficiency (MPHD) patients.
LHX4 mutations are rare in combined pituitary hormone deficiency, and even rarer in isolated GHD.
Furthermore, the reduction of body weight, using low-calorie diet combined with exercise, reduces the severity of psoriasis.Visceral adipose tissue is the largest endocrine organ, producing proinflammatory cytokines (TNF-Alfa, IL-6, IL-17) and adipokines (adiponectin, omentin, chemerin).
It has been shown that systemic treatment of psoriasis leads to an improvement in cardiovascular-associated biomarkers, eg adiponectin levels.
In conclusion, observed inflammatory and anti-inflammatory markers (CRP, adiponectin, leptin, resistin, and Lp-PLA2) are involved in both pathogenesis of MS and pathogenesis of psoriasis.
In this study we assessed the adipose tissue cytokines visfatin, adiponectin, and tumor necrosis factor-Alfa (TNF-Alfa) levels in psoriasis patients and evaluated the relationship between disease severity and cytokines.
Visfatin, adiponectin, and TNF-Alfa levels were measured in both the psoriasis and the control group.
These results indicate that TNF-Alfa and adiponectin play a part in psoriasis etiopathogenesis and can be used as parameters to evaluate the severity of the disease.
The following parameters were assessed in both groups: serum fasting glucose, fasting insulin, homeostasis model assessment-estimated insulin resistance (HOMA-IR) index, serum lipids, adiponectin, leptin, resistin, chemerin, omentin, vaspin, visfatin, retinol-binding protein 4, and high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hs-CRP) levels; blood pressure; body mass index; and the psoriasis area severity index (PASI) scores.
Moreover, at the start of the follow-up, the psoriasis patients had significantly lower levels of adiponectin and visfatin and significantly higher levels of vaspin and resistin than those of the control group.
The aim of this study was to investigate the association between miR-1207-5p expression in peripheral blood and the chemosensitivity of primary gallbladder carcinoma (PGBC).
An miR-1207-5p mimic (mimic group), an inhibitor (inhibitor group), and a negative control (NC group) sequence were transfected into human gallbladder carcinoma GBC-SD cells.
We found that miRNA-1207-5p (miR-1207-5p) was markedly downregulated in esophageal carcinoma (EC) tissues, and was correlated with EC differentiation, pathological stage and lymph node metastasis.
Immunohistological analyses reveal that RBM4 is expressed in the human brain regions affected in tauopathy, including the hippocampus and frontal cortex.
Programmed cell death 1 ligand 1 expression was significantly correlated with increased incidence of lymphovascular invasion (P = .038), extrathyroidal extension (P = .026), and concurrent lymphocytic thyroiditis (P = .003).
In this study, we investigated the role of PD-1 systemic engagement with PD-L1-Ig in lupus-like nephritis in SLE mice.
Our research demonstrated that the protective function of systemic activation of PD-1-PD-L1 axis with PD-L1-Ig attenuates the nephritis in SLE-prone mice, which facilitates us to understand the suppressive function of PD-1-PD-L1 axis in the pathogenesis and progress of the lupus nephritis, and to explore a possible effective therapeutic strategy to SLE.
PD-L1 was positively expressed in 53.2% PTCs, and its expression was positively correlated with rich tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs), background chronic lymphocytic thyroiditis (CLT), female gender, absence of psammoma bodies, and PD-1 expression.
Our results show that the distinctive pathological features of PTCs, including TILs, background CLT, female gender, psammoma bodies, and stromal calcification, are useful parameters for predicting PD-L1 or PD-1 expression.
The primary outcome parameters included the changes of corrected distant visual acuity (CDVA), uncorrected visual acuity (UCVA), the maximum keratometry value (Kmax) and minimum keratometry value (Kmin), the surface regularity index (SRI), the surface asymmetry index (SAI), the keratoconus prediction index (KPI), corneal thickness, and endothelial cell count.
Corrected distance visual acuity, refractive astigmatism, Kmax, Kmin, and IRI all improved after the treatment (P &lt; .05).
FAN1 is a major component of the Fanconi anemia-related pathway of DNA damage response (DDR) signaling.
In contrast, chronic injection of cisplatin at 2 mg/kg induced KIN that led to renal failure within 5 weeks in Fan1-/- mice but not in wild-type mice.
Our data show that Fan1 is involved in the physiologic response of kidney tubular cells to DNA damage, which contributes to the pathogenesis of CKD.
Moreover, Fan1-/- mice provide a new model with which to study the pathomechanisms of CKD.
It is associated with type II cobblestone lissencephaly, hydrocephalus, cerebellar malformations, eye abnormalities and congenital muscular dystrophy characterized by hypoglycosylation of alpha-dystroglycan.
An overview of various clinical studies of peptide vaccination strategies focusing on molecular targets such as the Wilms' tumor gene 1 (WT1), proteinase 3 (PR3), and receptor for hyaluronan acid-mediated motility (RHAMM) is provided.
Current clinical LAA peptide vaccination protocols targeting Wilms' tumor gene, proteinase-3 and the receptor for hyaluronan-mediated motility are reviewed and an outlook to dendritic cells, adjuvants and short oligodenucleotides is given.
Current clinical peptide vaccination trials targeting different epitopes of the Wilms' tumor gene 1 (WT1), the proteinase-3 derived epitope peptide (PR1) and the receptor for hyaluronic acid mediated motility (RHAMM/CD168)-derived epitope R3 are reviewed, and perspectives but also limitations of immunotherapeutic approaches for AML patients are discussed.
Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was performed for the following LAAs: preferentially expressed antigen in melanoma (PRAME), the receptor for hyaluronic acid mediated motility (RHAMM/CD168), Wilms' tumor gene 1 (WT-1) and proteinase 3.
Overall, the unique cystic lesion reported contained pilar squamous epithelium with in situ carcinoma and eccrine ductal structures, which was interpreted as a hybrid cyst composed of in situ trichilemmal carcinoma and a ductal eccrine component.
The cells showed abundant glycogen-containing cytoplasm (confirmed by Periodic acid Schiff stains with and without diastase), consistent with tricholemmal differentiation, and areas of tricholemmal/pilar-type keratinization (without a granular layer), consistent with tricholemmal carcinoma in situ, most likely arising in a tricholemmal/pilar cyst.
Tricholemmal (pilar) cysts are common benign adnexal lesions and atypia/dysplasia or carcinoma in situ arising within them is exceedingly rare.
We observed that mice with both outer-retinal degeneration and a deficiency in melanopsin exhibited complete loss of photoentrainment of the circadian oscillator, pupillary light responses, photic suppression of arylalkylamine-N-acetyltransferase transcript, and acute suppression of locomotor activity by light.
The role of FUT8 in breast cancer migration, invasion, and metastasis was confirmed using an in vitro transwell assay and mammary fat pad xenograft in vivo tumor model.
Importantly, FUT8 inhibition suppressed the invasive ability of highly metastatic breast cancer cells and impaired their lung metastasis.
Our results reveal a positive feedback mechanism of FUT8-mediated receptor core fucosylation that promotes TGF-Beta signaling and EMT, thus stimulating breast cancer cell invasion and metastasis.
Core-fucose-deficient mice generated by ablating the Alfa1,6 fucosyltransferase enzyme, Fut8, exhibit severe pulmonary emphysema, partly due to impaired macrophage function, similar to aged Toll-like receptor 4 (Tlr4)-deficient mice.
The feature selection procedure extracted several cancer-related and lymph node metastasis-related genes, such as TP73, PDX1, FUT8, HOXD1, NMT1, and SEMA3E.
Furthermore, decreased or blocked Alfa1, 6-fucosylation by FUT8 siRNA transfection or LCA Lectin blockage reduced stemness and EMT.
Taken together, our study reveals that fentanyl upregulated FUT8 expression, which increased Alfa1, 6-fucosylation level through activation of Wnt/Beta-catenin signaling pathway, thereby, induce stemness and EMT of breast cancer cells.
The core fucosylation of N-glycans on glycoproteins is catalyzed by fucosyltransferase 8 (FUT8) in mammalian cells and is involved in various biological functions, such as protein function, cancer progression, and postnatal development.
FUT8-mediated core fucosylation of L1CAM drives melanoma metastasis.
Upregulation of core fucosylation (FUT8) and downregulation of Alfa-1,2 fucosylation (FUT1, FUT2) were identified as features of metastatic melanoma.
Using both in vitro and in vivo studies, we demonstrate FUT8 is a driver of melanoma metastasis which, when silenced, suppresses invasion and tumor dissemination.
FUT8 and its targets represent therapeutic targets in melanoma metastasis.
identified the glycosyltransferase FUT8 as a previously unrecognized mediator of melanoma metastasis, establishing core fucosylation as a potential therapeutic target for prevention and treatment of metastatic tumors.
These findings support the proposal that deletions and insertions within the calmodulin-like domain produce pseudoachondroplasia, while amino acid substitutions with this domain may produce either pseudoachondroplasia or multiple epiphyseal dysplasia.
DATS can inhibit the proliferation and colony-forming of SP cells in multiple myeloma, and induce the G1/S arrest that may be carried out via suppressing the expression of cyclin D1, cyclin E, CDK2 and CDK4.
These results suggest that serotonin oxidation by myeloperoxidase or the action of other oxidants could cause functional alteration of cellular proteins, which may be related to neurodegeneration processes or irritable bowel syndrome.
We recently showed that Man-A stimulated reactive oxygen species (ROS) which were upstream of serine/threonine (Ser/Thr) dephosphorylation and caspase-dependent cleavage of MEK and Akt in lymphoma apoptosis.
Taken together, we conclude that PP1Alfa is an important proximal effector of Man-A mediated lymphoma apoptosis and that the mechanisms of Man-A action warrant further investigation.
Cytosolic Alfa-mannosidase (Man2C1) trims free oligosaccharides in mammalian cells, and its down-regulation reportedly delays cancer growth by inducing mitotic arrest or apoptosis.
Here we report that manumycin A (Man A), an inhibitor of farnesyl protein transferase, reduces cancer cell viability through induction of non-apoptotic, non-autophagic cytoplasmic vacuolation death in TNBC cells.
Here we show that Alfa-mannosidase 2C1 (MAN2C1) inhibits PTEN function in prostate cancer (PC) cells and is associated with a reduction in PTEN function in primary PC.
hMan2c1 transgene promoted growth, invasion, and metastasis to lung of implanted hepatoma H22 and sarcoma S180.
To study the effects of suppressed alpha-mannosidase Man2c1 gene expression on EC9706 human esophageal carcinoma cells, the cells were treated with short interfering RNA.
The data imply that induction of mitotic arrest and consequent apoptosis resulted from microtubule disorganization, which appears to be one of the major cellular mechanisms by which suppressed expression of the Man2c1 gene causes growth inhibition of EC9706 esophageal carcinoma cells.
The growth of CNE-2L2 cell, a cloned line of human nasopharyngeal carcinoma with a high potentiality of metastasis to lung was inhibited to a certain extent after transfection with a recombinant antisense expression vector of a cDNA encoding a human alpha-mannosidase (pRc/CMV-antisense 6A8 cDNA) (the Genbank accession number of 6A8 cDNA is U37248) in comparison with that of the cell transfected with the Mock and of the wild cell.
One hundred and ninety primary formalin fixed, paraffin embedded NSCLC lesions were stained with HLA class I heavy chain-specific mAb HC-10.
A 33-year-old Zimbabwean female presented with cryptococcal meningitis and newly diagnosed HIV with a CD4 count of 51 cells/ my L (4%).
However, over the ensuing 18 months, her clinical course was marked by periodic worsening with symptoms resembling cryptococcal meningitis despite having achieved CD4 counts &gt;=400 cells/ my L. Although initially treated for relapsing cryptococcal immune reconstitution syndrome, a brain biopsy taken 17 months after initial presentation showed budding Cryptococci.
Peptide receptor radionuclide therapy (PRRT) either using Lu-177 or Y-90 peptide radiopharmaceuticals has emerged as promising treatment modality in patients with inoperable metastatic neuroendocrine tumour (NET) including medullary thyroid cancer, because of overexpression of somatostatin receptor 2 (sstr-2) on these cells.
The several investigators have used PRRT in non-iodine avid differentiated thyroid cancer patients with limited success, where other treatment modalities have failed, probably due to faint sstr-2 expression in these lesions.
Gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine neoplasm (GEP-NEN) is known to overexpress somatostatin receptors (SSTRs), most commonly SSTR2 and SSTR5.
The present study detected the expression of SSTR2 and SSTR5 in GEP-NEN and investigated the efficacy and safety of octreotide long-acting release (LAR) in the treatment of advanced gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (GEP-NET) in China.
Peptide receptor radionuclide therapy (PRRT) with radiolabeled analogues has been developed as a new tool for the management of metastatic well-differentiated (grade 1 and 2) neuroendocrine tumors expressing somatostatin receptor (SSTR2).
We have also evaluated the tumor targeting molecular imaging ability of these branched copolymer nanoparticle in vivo using nude/NCr mice bearing AR42J rat pancreatic tumor (SSTR2 positive) and A549 human lung carcinoma tumor (SSTR2 negative) xenografts.
There is also suggestive evidence of an association with two uncommon disorders, Kreiborg-Pakistani syndrome (craniosynostosis and dental anomalies), and insulin-resistant diabetes mellitus with acanthosisnigricans.
Investigating the association between plasma levels of cytokines and chemokines, Selenoprotein S (SELS) gene variation and osteoarthritis (OA) subtypes.
Proliferative responses were assessed against rgp160, rp24, and a panel of recall antigens and mitogens.
At day 56, all rgp160 recipients had stimulation indexes (rgp160/rp24) greater than 3.0, and five of six had differences in counts per minute (cpm) greater than 1000.
Renovascular hypertension was induced in rats by the two-kidney two-clip (2K2C) method.
Berberine could improve cardiac contractility of 2K2C model rats, and inhibit left ventricular remodeling especially myocardial fibrosis in renovascular hypertension rats.
In conclusion, these data indicate that different Nox expression might account for substrate preference and the formation of O(2)*(-) by NAD(P)H oxidase resulting from elevated Ang II in the 2K2C model contributes to the development of renovascular hypertension and subsequent cardiac remodeling.
The aim of present experiments was to characterize the contribution of circulating ANF and its vascular relaxing effects in the two kidney-two clip (2K2C) experimental model of renovascular hypertension.
The present study was designed to follow the development of 2 kidney-2 clip (2k-2c) renovascular hypertension in rats depleted of central NE and to analyze the central and peripheral renin-angiotensin system.
The effect of chronic hypobaric hypoxia (CHH) on the development of 2k-2c Goldblatt renovascular hypertension has been analyzed in rats of both sexes.
Administration of angiotensin I converting enzyme inhibitor (SQ 14225) reduced the blood pressure both in the benign and malignant phases of 2K2C renovascular hypertension, and a ganglionic blocking agent (hexamethonium) also decreased the blood pressure.
For those with APA and mild tricuspid regurgitation (TR), a modified BTS and reduction atrioplasty may be the best initial option.
Patients in the BTS group required more tricuspid valvuloplasties and had more tricuspid regurgitation at follow-up evaluation.
However, the patients in the BTS group exhibited more tricuspid regurgitation, and the patients in the RV-PA group had increased pulmonary artery interventions.
CDY2 and HSFY were the only identified genes for which differences in expression were observed between the MA and obstructive azoospermia cohorts.
Men with obstructive azoospermia had 12-fold higher relative expression of CDY2 transcript (1.33 +/- 0.40 vs. 0.11 +/- 0.04; P=0.0003) and 16-fold higher expression of HSFY transcript (0.78 +/- 0.32 vs. 0.05 +/- 0.02; P=0.0005) compared to men with MA.
CDY2 and HSFY were also underexpressed in patients with Sertoli cell only syndrome.
Western blotting data revealed HSFY in the testicular tissues with normal spermatogenesis, maturation arrest, and Sertoli cell-only syndrome, but the amount of the protein in the maturation arrest and Sertoli cell-only syndrome samples was altered.
However, the expression of HSFY was low or absent in spermatogenic cells of maturation arrest specimens, and the ratio of HSFY expressed in Sertoli cells was different in the specimens with maturation arrest and with Sertoli cell-only syndrome.
We propose that deletions of the testis-specific HSFY gene family may be a cause of unexplained cases of idiopathic male infertility.
These results may suggest that deletion of HSFY is involved in azoospermia or oligospermia.
HSFY (heat shock transcription factor, Y chromosome) has been mapped in the AZFb region of the Y chromosome, whose deletion results in severe male infertility.
The identification of ITPA protective and SLC29A1 risk genotypes still appears to be a current methodology in RBV dosing during hepatitis C virus therapy with DAAs.
Genotypes of IL-28B and ENT1 (rs12980275, rs12979860, rs8099917 and rs760370) were analyzed in 107 HIV/HCV co-infectors in Hunan province and the distributions of gene polymorphisms were compared between chronic hepatitis and spontaneous clearance groups.
Ribavirin (RBV), a guanosine analog for treatment of hepatitis C, is a substrate of a nucleoside transporter, solute carrier family 29 member 1 (SLC29A1).
Patients (n=169) chronically infected with the hepatitis C virus genotype 1, treated with standard doses of pegylated interferon-Alfa and weight-based doses of ribavirin for up to 48 weeks, were genotyped for 21 variants in nucleoside transporter genes SLC28A2, SLC28A3, SLC29A1, and SLC29A2, selected to include reported functional variants and to span the complete gene loci.
PPX, cisplatin, and concurrent radiation are well tolerated, easily administered regimen for esophageal cancer with a low incidence of significant esophagitis and a high pathologic CR rate consistent with the preclinical data of PPX and radiation.
Its diagnosis must be confirmed by a CT scan in order to eliminate the other causes that may lead to conductive hearing loss with an absence of stapedial reflex: fixation of the head of the malleus to the lateral wall of the tympanic cavity, absence of the long process of the incus or stapes, gusher syndrome, primary cholesteatoma, or tympanic facial nerve neuroma blocking the stapes.
Protein aggregates are hallmarks of nearly all age-related neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and several polyglutamine diseases such as Huntington's disease and different forms of spinocerebellar ataxias (SCA; SCA1-3, SCA6, and SCA7).
Mutation of GRIP1 in mice displays essentially the same phenotype of the mutations of Fras1 or Frem2, which are the animal models of the human genetic disorder Fraser syndrome.
The GRIP1 PDZ12/Fras1 peptide complex not only provides a mechanistic explanation of the link between GRIP1 and the Fraser syndrome but may also serve as a foundation for searching for potential mutations in GRIP1 that could lead to the Fraser syndrome.
In one animal model of Fraser syndrome, the eye-blebs (eb) mouse, Grip1 is disrupted by a deletion of two coding exons.
Our data indicate that GRIP1 is required for normal cell-matrix interactions during early embryonic development and that inactivation of Grip1 causes Fraser syndrome-like defects in mice.
Likelihood ratios (LRs), sensitivity, and specificity were calculated for individual symptoms and physical examination findings for the diagnosis of pneumonia.
Pooled sensitivity and specificity for the diagnosis of pneumonia using LUS were 94% (95% CI, 92%-96%) and 96% (94%-97%), respectively; pooled positive and negative LRs were 16.8 (7.7-37.0) and 0.07 (0.05-0.10), respectively; and, the area-under-the-ROC curve was 0.99 (0.98-0.99).
Here we report the compound ZCL039, a benzoxaborole-based derivative of AN2690, as a potent anti-pneumococcal agent that inhibits S. pneumoniae LeuRS (SpLeuRS) activity.
Twelve LRs were revaccinated with the pH1N1 vaccine, and 7 were subsequently vaccinated with the 2010 seasonal trivalent influenza vaccine.
Herein we report that loss of Mus81 in Blm hypomorph mutant mice leads to infertility, and growth and developmental defects that are not observed in single mutants.
Myoferlin, a member of ferlin family of proteins, was first discovered as a candidate gene for muscular dystrophy and cardiomyopathy.
Together, these findings demonstrate the importance of dysferlin and myoferlin for transverse tubule function and in the genesis of muscular dystrophy.
Ferlin mutations are associated with muscular dystrophy (dysferlin) and deafness (otoferlin) in humans, and infertility in Caenorhabditis elegans (Fer-1) and Drosophila (misfire), demonstrating their importance for normal cellular functioning.
mRNA expression of the AMPs Alfa defensin (HNP-1); cathelicidin (LL-37); and Beta defensins (hBD-1, hBD-2, hBD-3, hBD-4) in human uveal and cutaneous melanoma cell lines, primary human uveal melanocytes, and primary human uveal melanoma cells was determined by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction.
Previous studies have reported that LL-37 participates in the development of numerous tumour types, such as ovarian cancer, lung cancer, melanoma and breast cancer.
However, the function of LL-37 in the development of skin squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) has not yet been fully elucidated.
The roles of LL-37 in oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) are still not clear.
Here human CAMP/LL-37 expression was assessed by immunohistochemistry in normal and OSCC tissues.
Taken together, these results suggested that human CAMP/LL-37 might act as a tumor-suppressor in OSCC and DNA methylation might play roles during carcinogenesis via directly downregulating human CAMP promoter activity.
miR-663a is upregulated by administration of the human cathelicidin AMP, LL-37, and its analogue peptide, FF/CAP18, in the colon cancer cell line HCT116.
Previous studies have demonstrated that it LL-37 serves a functional role in the development of numerous types of cancer including ovarian, breast, prostate and lung cancer.
Studies have shown that LL-37 participates in the development of a variety of tumours, such as lung cancer, ovarian cancer, breast cancer and melanoma.
However, the role of LL-37 in the development of skin squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is not clear.
The aim of this study was to evaluate an engineered nanostructure to silence five important oncogenes, including BAG1, MDM2, Bcl-2, BIRC5 (survivin) and XIAP, in acute myeloid leukemia subtype 2 (AML-M2).
B-cell lymphoma (BCL) 2-associated AthanoGene-1 (BAG-1) is a prosurvival chaperone recently found involved in the maintenance of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cells survival in vitro.
Silencing of BAG-1 expression confirmed a decreased BCL-2 protein level but, in addition, provoked the increased transcription of GADD34 stress sensor.
A similar phenomenon was triggered after addition of Thioflavin S, which was shown to block BAG-1/BCL-2 interaction and to increase cell death, enforcing a prosurvival role of the BAG-1 protein in AML.
Neuronal glucocorticoid receptor (GR) overexpressing, B-cell lymphoma 2 (Bcl-2) heterozygous KO, and Bcl-2-associated athanogene (BAG1) heterozygous KO mice show vulnerability to mood swings.
We show that reexpression of miR-28 impairs cell proliferation and clonogenic properties of BL cells by modulating several targets including MAD2 mitotic arrest deficient-like 1, MAD2L1, a component of the spindle checkpoint whose down-regulation is essential in mediating miR-28-induced proliferation arrest, and BCL2-associated athanogene, BAG1, an activator of the ERK pathway.
The bag-1 and bcl-2 coexpressing cells produced more IgG than the the cells expressing bcl-2 alone.Apoptosis of Friend murine erythroleukemia(F-MEL) cells was suppressed with antisense c-jun expression.
BCL2 associated Athano-Gene 1 (BAG1) is a multifunctional protein that has been described to be involved in different cell processes linked to cell survival.
Here, BAG1 protein was found highly expressed in children with acute myeloid leukemia at diagnosis, and in a cohort of leukemic cell lines.
A silencing approach was used for determining BAG1's role in AML, finding that its down-regulation decreased expression of BCL2, BCL-XL, MCL1, and phospho-ERK1/2, all proteins able to sustain leukemia, without affecting the pro-apoptotic protein BAX.
Cell death was CASPASE-3 dependent, was accompanied by PARP cleavage and documented by an increased release of pro-apoptotic molecules Smac/DIABLO and Cytochrome c. BAG1 was found to directly maintain BCL2 and to protect MCL1 from proteasomal degradation by controlling USP9X expression, which appeared to be its novel target.
Finally, BAG1 was found able to affect leukemia cell fate by influencing the expression of anti-apoptotic proteins crucial for AML maintenance.
These agents also upregulate the expression of trophic/protective molecules such as brain-derived neurotrophic factor, nerve growth factor, B-cell lymphoma 2, serine-threonine kinase, and Bcl-2 associated athanogene 1, and inactivate proapoptotic molecules such as GSK-3.
These studies have produced informative models that have altered the expression of genes/pathways implicated in BD, including the point mutation D181A of mouse mitochondrial DNA polymerase (POLG), glutamate receptor 6 (GluR6), Clock, extracellular regulated kinase 1 (ERK1), glycogen synthase kinase-3beta (GSK-3beta), B-cell lymphoma 2 (Bcl-2) and Bcl-2-associated athanogene (BAG-1).
To evaluate the diagnostic accuracy of the Serum-Ascites Albumin Gradient (GASA), Protein Concentration in the Ascitic Fluid (PTLA), Albumin Concentration in the ascitic fluid (CAA) and the Protein Ascites/Serum Ratio (IPAS) for the diagnosis of ascites due to portal hypertension.
We obtained the diagnostic accuracy, sensitivity, specificity, PPV and NPV of the Serum-Ascites Albumin Gradient (GASA), Protein Concentration in the Ascitic Fluid (PTLA), Albumin Concentration in the ascitic fluid (CAA) and the Protein Ascites/Serum Ratio (IPAS) for the diagnosis of ascites due to portal hypertension.
Differences between HIV and AD in the patterns of ABeta and Tau biomarkers suggest that CNS HIV infection and AD may not share some of same mechanisms of neuronal injury.
In addition, Ost treatment in APP/PS1 double transgenic (Tg) mice markedly restored cognitive functions, reduced ABeta plague production and rescued functional impairment of hippocampal neurons.
We depleted microglia by injecting diphtheria toxin (DT) in CX 3 CR1 CreER/+ :R26 DTR/+ (CX 3 CR1-iDTR) mice crossed with APPswe/PSEN1dE9 (APP/PS1) mice.
"Klickbare" 1,2,4-Trioxolan-Proteinprofilingsonden (ABPPs) wurden so entworfen, dass sie ihre Aktivitaet gegen Malaria behalten und die molekularen Targets des Blutstadiums von Plasmodium falciparum in situ alkylieren.
Moreover, four times of infusion of ADSCs resulted in a more significant reduction of blood glucose and insulin resistance, whereas SPX exacerbated hyperglycemia and insulin resistance and attenuated the effects of ADSCs.
The purpose of the current study was to determine the effect of obesity and type 2 diabetes (T2DM), and the effect of glucose ingestion on circulating spexin concentration in adolescents.
Study 2 examined the effects of spexin, a novel adipokine, on obesity, type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), and HS in these mice.
Study 2 indicated (1) that obese DIO mice often also have T2DM and/or nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD); (2) confirmed that spexin treatment caused weight loss in DIO mice; (3) in DIO mice with T2DM, spexin also improved glucose tolerance, decreasing insulin resistance and HbAlc.
Therefore, we aimed to examine its expression in human tissues and test whether spexin could have a role in glucose and lipid metabolism in type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM).
The prestimulation insulin secretion rate and maximal insulin secretion rate in response to hyperglycemia and arginine were significantly lower in SPx than in WPx, Kx, or Ns (P &lt; 0.05).
Both SPx and WPx demonstrated suppression of glucagon release in response to graded hyperglycemia, but failure to adequately suppress arginine-induced glucagon release.
A population pharmacokinetics (PK) analysis was performed to characterize T-DM1 PK and evaluate the impact of patient characteristics on T-DM1 PK in previously treated patients with HER2-positive advanced gastric cancer (AGC).
The curcumin analogue DM-1 (sodium 4-[5-(4-hydroxy-3-methoxy-phenyl)-3-oxo-penta-1,4-dienyl]-2-methoxy-phenolate) has substantial anti-tumor activity in melanoma, but its mechanism of action remains unclear.
Of these TOP1 and ADK were regulated by DM-1 in treatment-naive and vemurafenib-resistant melanoma cells respectively.
DM-1 is a sodium phenolate and curcumin analog with proven anticancer, anti-proliferative and anti-metastatic properties.
In this paper, the DM-1 compound showed in vivo antitumor activity alone or in combination with chemotherapeutic DTIC in B16F10 melanoma-bearing mice.
Beneficial effects such as melanoma tumor burden reduction with pyknotic nuclei, decreased nuclei/cytoplasmic ratio and nuclear degradation occurred after DM-1 treatment.
DTIC+DM-1 treatment induced the recovery of anemia arising from melanoma and immunomodulation.
Furthermore, melanoma tumors treated with DM-1 showed a preferential apoptotic intrinsic pathway by decreasing Bcl-2/Bax ratio.
Considering the chemoresistance exhibited by melanoma towards conventional chemotherapy drugs, DM-1 compound in monotherapy or in combination therapy provides a promising improvement in melanoma treatment with a reduction of side effects.
A variant t(1;19)(q23;p13.3) translocation creates reciprocal DAZAP1/MEF2D and MEF2D/DAZAP1 fusion genes that are expressed in acute lymphoblastic leukemia.
In this case, the patient was diagnosed with focal atonic seizures as the cause of the monolimb weakness, which had been initially misdiagnosed aas transient ischemic attacks.
Using an in vitro biofilm system, we unexpectedly discovered that several positive regulators of biofilm formation during normoxia, including Tec1, Ace2, Czf1, Och1, and Als3, had little or no influence on biofilm development during hypoxia, irrespective of the carbon dioxide level, indicating that C. albicans biofilm pathways differ depending on the oxygen level.
Other cytokine-phenotype associations included increased IL-8 and constitutional symptoms; IL-2R, IL-12, and transfusion need; IL-2R, IL-8, and leukocytosis; IP-10 and thrombocytopenia; HGF, MIG, IL-1RA, and marked splenomegaly; and IL-1RA, IL-2R, IP-10, MIP-1Beta, and JAK2V617F.
Beside this, the procalcitonin levels can be used for monitoring response to antimicrobial therapy, diagnosis of secondary inflammations, diagnosis of renal involvement in paediatric urinary tract infection, etc.
The changes in DNA methylation associated with chronic cystitis were DNA hypomethylation of the Calca gene in the control tissue and DNA hypermethylation for the Calca, Timp3, Mmp2, and Igf2r genes compared with that in the control tissue.
DNA methylation changes were noted in the Calca, Timp3, Mmp2, and Igf2r genes during chronic cystitis in a murine model.
Procalcitonin (PCT), a precursor of calcitonin, is a 116 amino acid protein that has been proposed as a marker of disease severity in conditions such as septicaemia, meningitis, pneumonia, urinary tract infection (UTI) and fungal and parasitic infection.
LyP-1-SPIONs are promising in treating cancer as they accumulated in the nucleus of MCF-7 cells which expressed p32 and almost stopped tumor growth by combined MIH and targeted therapy.
LyP-1 is a cyclic 9 amino acid peptide that can bind to breast cancer cells.
The results demonstrate that LyP-1-Fe3O4 significantly improves MRI contrast of TNBC, hence has the potential to be exploited for the specific delivery of cancer therapeutics.
Statistically significant differences in the allelic and genotypic frequencies of PTPN 22 -1123G&gt;C and CTLA-4 49A&gt;G were observed between the MG(+)-thymoma group and the controls (P = 0.000, 0.003), but not between the MG(-)-thymoma and MG-thymoma(-) groups and the controls (P = 0.192/P = 0.214 and P = 0.067/P = 0.254).
The results show an association between the PTPN22 1123G&gt;C genotype and thymoma-associated MG, with significant synergy with the CTLA-4 G alleles.
The peptide with the LyP-1 targeting motif was more effective at knockdown in MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells than the peptide with the iRGD motif.
Furthermore, the hydrated PEG outer corona is used for prolonging circulation time, while the active targeting ligand, LyP-1, is served to bind to breast cancer cells and lymphatic endothelial cells in tumor for inhibiting metastasis.
M-DOX NPs with LyP-1 targeting ligand effectively accumulated in MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells.
Within the knowledge of the critical role of p32 receptor in cancer cell metabolism, this study can lead to further developments in anticancer therapy by targeting p32 with LyP-1 derivatives as active targeting moiety.
This data can also be applied for the development of new drug delivery systems in which LyP-1 can be used for its targeting and anticancer properties.
Salivary Alfa-amylase (sAA) activity alternations are observed in major depressive disorder (MDD) being associated with depression severity and its specific psychopathological dimensions with anxiety being attributed to distress.
Key words:Salivary alpha-amylase, major depressive disorder, Spielberger State-Trait Anxiety Inventory, Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression.
Differences in evening sAA levels were examined between patient groups (i.e., 752 current major depressive disorder [MDD], 611 remitted MDD, and 329 healthy controls) and between 46 tricyclic antidepressant (TCA) users, 307 selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) users, 97 users of another antidepressant, and 1242 non-users.
The role of two members of the ETS (E26 avian leukemia oncogene) family of transcription factors, ETS-1 and ETS-2, has been investigated in many cancers but has not yet been studied in ocular tumors.
Using semi-quantitative reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and western blots experiments, we compared changes in ETS-1 and ETS-2 expression, their protein levels, and the regulation of some of their target gene expressions at different stages of the ocular tumoral progression in the transgenic mouse model, Tyrp-1-TAg, with those in normal eyes from control mice of the same age.
Our findings suggest that ETS-1 and ETS-2 are upregulated in ocular tumors derived from the retinal epithelium and may be involved in one or several signaling pathways that activate the expression of a set of genes involved in ocular tumor progression such as those encoding ICAM-1 (intercellular adhesion molecule-1), PAI-1 (Plasminogen activator inhibitor-1), MCP-1 (monocyte chemoattractant protein-1) and p16 (Cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor 2A).
Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) marker expression suggested that atypical adenomas maintain their epithelial phenotype to a higher degree than do ATCs.
Significant differences were also found between non-malignant pathological thyroid samples (goiters and adenomas) and malignant tumors (p &lt; 0.001, Wilcoxon test, t approximation), anaplastic carcinomas (ATCs) and all other samples and also between ATCs and all other malignant tumors (p &lt; 0.05, Wilcoxon test, t approximation).
Expression levels of MSAC genes (hBUB1, hBUBR1, hBUB3 and hMAD2) were evaluated in 9 follicular thyroid adenomas (FAs), 9 follicular thyroid carcinomas (FTCs), 21 papillary thyroid carcinomas (PTCs), 5 anaplastic (undifferentiated) thyroid carcinomas (ATCs) and 3 adjacent normal thyroid tissues (NTs) by real-time quantitative RT-PCR.
Archival material from 88 thyroid neoplasms [50 PTCs, eight anaplastic carcinomas (ATCs), 25 follicular thyroid carcinomas (FTCs) and five follicular adenomas (FAs)] were analysed for ret/PTC-1 and H4 expression using 5' nuclease assay (TaqMan RT-PCR).
We report the clinical observation of a 2.5-year-old girl, referred for the diagnosis of Morning Glory syndrome in the left eye with severe amblyopia (1/10 Rossano 1/20) and esotropia.
The association between the reported mean TTR and major bleeding and stroke/systemic embolism was analyzed by random-effects meta-regression with and without adjustment for relevant clinical cohort characteristics.
In the adjusted meta-regressions, the impact of mean TTR on the occurrence of hemorrhage was adjusted for the mean age and the proportion of populations with prior stroke or transient ischemic attack.
In univariable meta-regression, increasing mean TTR was significantly associated with a decreased rate of both major bleeding and stroke/systemic embolism.
However, after adjustment mean TTR was no longer significantly associated with stroke/systemic embolism.
Although higher mean TTR in warfarin therapy was associated with lower complication rates in atrial fibrillation, the strength of the association was decreased when adjusting for differences in relevant clinical characteristics of the patient cohorts.
Diabetes mellitus [odds ratio (OR) 1.38; P = 0.008], peripheral artery disease (PAD, OR 1.62; P = 0.048), and HAS-BLED (OR 1.13; P = 0.022) were independently associated with TTR &lt; 70%.
Cardiac transthyretin (ATTR) amyloidosis is an increasingly recognized, progressive, and fatal cardiomyopathy, the natural history of which remains unclear.
We sought to establish and validate a new prognostic staging system applicable to patients with both wild-type ATTR (ATTRwt) and hereditary variant ATTR (ATTRv) amyloid cardiomyopathy.
This simple, universally applicable staging system stratifies patients with both ATTRwt and ATTRv amyloid cardiomyopathy into prognostic categories.
The DENN Domain Containing 1B (DENND1B) gene has an important role on T cell receptor (TCR) down-regulation on Th2 cells and studies have shown that mutations or loss of this factor can be associated with increased Th2 responses and asthma.
The aim of this work is to evaluate the association of polymorphisms in the DENND1B with asthma and allergy markers phenotypes in Brazilian children.
The DENND1B gene was associated with different phenotypes such as severe asthma and atopic markers (specific IgE production, skin prick test and IL-13 production).
In conclusion, polymorphisms in the DENND1B are significantly associated with development of asthma and atopy and these polymorphisms can influence DENND1B expression and consequently, asthma.
Among those, only the DENND1B risk allele and paternal history of asthma and allergy were associated with increased FeNO values (V) suggesting that raised FeNO in neonatal life is primarily an inherited trait.
Variants in DENND1B are associated with development of childhood asthma and other immune disorders.
Moreover, human TH2 cells carrying asthma-associated DENND1B variants express less DENND1B and phenocopy Dennd1b(-/-) TH2 cells.
These results provide a molecular basis for how DENND1B, a previously unrecognized regulator of TCR downmodulation in TH2 cells, contributes to asthma pathogenesis and how DENN-domain-containing proteins may contribute to other human disorders.
show that the asthma susceptibility gene DENND1B controls cytokine production in Th2 lymphocytes by controlling the rate of TCR internalization and routing to endosomes, providing a molecular basis for how DENND1B contributes to asthma pathogenesis.
We report associations between several DENND1B variants (P = 2.2 x 10(-7) for rs4915551) on chromosome 1q31 and BMI from a meta-analysis of GWAS data using 2691 asthmatic children (screening data).
The top DENND1B single nucleotide polymorphisms(SNPs) were next evaluated in seven independent replication data sets comprising 2014 asthmatics, and rs4915551 was nominally replicated (P &lt; 0.05) in two of the seven studies and of borderline significance in one (P = 0.059).
DENND1B was recently identified as an asthma susceptibility gene in a GWAS on children, and here, we find evidence that DENND1B variants may also be associated with BMI in asthmatic children.
We sought to search for new variants associated with asthma and attempt to replicate the association with four loci reported previously (ORMDL3, PDE4D, DENND1B and IL1RL1).
We have identified a locus containing DENND1B on chromosome 1q31.3 that is associated with susceptibility to asthma.
The recently described Sagliker syndrome (SS) might be an exaggerated version of ROD and is a very striking and prominent feature of secondary hyperparathyroidism in patients with end-stage renal disease (ESRD).
Growth retardation, decreased final height and renal osteodystrophy (ROD) are common complications of childhood chronic kidney disease (CKD), resulting from a combination of abnormalities in the growth hormone (GH) axis, vitamin D deficiency, hyperparathyroidism, hypogonadism, inadequate nutrition, cachexia and drug toxicity.
Secondary hyperparathyroidism and 125 dihydroxy vitamin D3 deficiency are the major causative factors in ROD.
Twelve cases of ductal CMBCs (11 not otherwise specified type, and 1 basal phenotype), 11 cases of SGCs (5 eccrine carcinomas, 3 porocarcinomas, and 3 microcystic adnexal carcinomas), 2 benign sweat gland neoplasm cases, and 2 primary breast cancer cases were retrieved and analyzed with the following IHC panel: mammaglobin, gross cystic disease fluid protein (GCDFP) 15, p63, basal cytokeratins (CK5, CK14, and CK17), androgen receptor, and PAX5.
The results demonstrated that p-ERK, CGRP and COX-2 mediated neurogenic inflammation and central sensitization in migraine.
Here, CRFR2 can be recruited by either high (pharmacological) concentrations of CRF or by endogenous CRFR2 ligands, the urocortins, leading to analgesia (pain termination).
The involvement of glucocorticoid and CRF-2 receptors in the development of analgesia evoked by systemic administration of CRF was studied by blockade of these receptors by their specific antagonists RU 38486 and astressin 2-B, respectively, in anesthetized rats.
The participation of glucocorticoid receptors and CRF-2 receptors in the CRF-induced analgesia was investigated by the receptors antagonists: RU38486 or astressin 2-B, respectively, in anaesthetized rats.
In view of the lamina-specific and similar distributions of the two CRF receptor mRNAs with their ligands, we suggest that CRF1 and CRF2 are involved in peripheral stress adaptation processes, such as modulation of stress-induced analgesia and the mediation of visceral nociceptive information by CRF2.
Knockdown of hepatic LIPIN2 in DIO mice reduced fasting hyperglycemia and improved hepatic insulin signaling.
Growing evidence links the three mammalian lipin proteins, i.e., lipin-1, lipin-2 and lipin-3, to metabolic and cardiovascular diseases such as noninsulin-dependent diabetes mellitus and atherosclerosis.
Several studies have demonstrated that polymorphisms in the LPIN1 and LPIN2 genes are associated with metabolic disease traits, including insulin sensitivity, diabetes, blood pressure and response to thiazolidinedione drugs.
This SNP is located at the 3' untranslated region of the LPIN2 gene, which is a plausible candidate for type 2 diabetes and obesity.
rs3745012 SNP of the LPIN2 gene is associated with type 2 diabetes and fat distribution.
Inner-ear hair cell differentiation requires Atoh1 function, while Eya1, Six1, and Sox2 are coexpressed in sensory progenitors and mutations in these genes cause sensorineural hearing loss.
While mutations in human EYA4 cause late-onset deafness at the DFNA10 locus, mutations in human EYA1 cause branchio-oto-renal (BOR) syndrome.
Pendred's syndrome, distal renal tubular acidosis, waardenburg's syndrome, X-linked congenital mixed deafness, branchio-oto-renal syndrome, and oto-facio-cervical syndrome can express their genotypic alteration as enlarged vestibular aqueduct syndrome.
Allele variants of EYA1 and EYA4, two members of the vertebrate Eya gene family, underlie two types of inherited human deafness, branchio-oto-renal (BOR) syndrome and DFNA10, respectively.
During early inner ear development, Eya1 is expressed in the ventromedial wall of the otic vesicle (the site of the future sensory epithelia), in the statoacoustic ganglion, and in the periotic mesenchyme, consistent with the cochlear anomalies and sensorineural hearing loss of BOR syndrome.
LIGHT (lymphotoxin-like inducible protein that competes with glycoprotein D for herpes virus entry on T cells) is a tumor necrosis factor core family member that regulates T-cell activation and causes experimental inflammatory bowel disease.
To clarify the biological differences between small cell lung carcinoma (SCLC) and large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma (LCNEC), we investigated the expression of two bHLH type transcription factors, human achaete-scute homolog 1 (hASH1) and hairy/enhancer of split 1 (HES1), which positively and negatively regulate the neuroendocrine differentiation of respiratory epithelial cells, respectively.
The frequencies of the expressions of CD56, mASH1, TTF-1, and p16 were higher and that of NeuroD was lower in small cell carcinoma than in large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma.
Here we show that reduced Daf1 transcription in lupus-prone mice was not associated with a reduction in the Daf1 transcription factor SP1.
Here, we describe a deep sequencing-aided engineering strategy to fine-tune the specificity of an angiopoietin-2 (Ang2)/vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) dual action Fab, 5A12.1 for the treatment of age-related macular degeneration.
Angiopoietin 2 (ANG2) is a proangiogenic cytokine which may have an implication in neovascular age related macular degeneration (nAMD).
Levels of ANG2 in the aqueous were significantly higher in nAMD patients than those of the control group (p &lt; 0.0001), so were hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), interleukin-8 (IL-8) and tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase 1 (TIMP 1), all with p &lt; 0.001.
ANG2 is upregulated in patients with nAMD and correlates with severity of disease at presentation.
We determine the angiopoietin 2 (ANGPT2) gene as a new susceptibility gene for neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nAMD) and polypoidal choroidal vasculopathy (PCV).
In the Hong Kong cohort, four SNPs in ANGPT2 (rs13255574, rs4455855, rs13269021, and rs11775442) were nominally associated with nAMD and PCV.
Interaction analysis revealed the CFH SNP rs800292 has a highly significant interaction with the ANGPT2 SNP rs13269021 in nAMD and PCV in the combined analysis.
This study reveals ANGPT2 as a new susceptibility gene for nAMD and PCV, and it may affect disease susceptibility in association with CFH.
Here, we engineered a Two-in-One VEGF/angiopoietin 2 antibody with dual action Fab (DAF) as a potential therapeutic for neovascular age-related macular degeneration.
Our study connects the interaction between RhoGDI1 and ephrinB1 to the promotion of cancer cell behavior associated with tumor progression.
The purpose of the present study was to assess the role of RhoGDIs in the invasiveness and migration of liver cancer, and to determine their clinical prognostic significances in HCC following liver transplantation (LT).
In addition, the functions of RhoGDIs in liver cancer cell line were studied in vitro.
As a result, the downregulation of RhoGDI1 and RhoGDI2 at mRNA and protein levels were detected in HCC when compared with that of adjacent noncancerous tissues (P&lt;0.05).
However, the level of RhoGDI3 was identified to be similar in tumor and para-carcinoma tissues.
Results from the present study indicate that RhoGDI dysregulation is a frequent event in human HCC, and that it promotes cancer progression by stimulating cell migration and invasion.
RhoGDI proteins have been implicated in several human cancers; changes in their expression levels have shown pro- or anti-tumorigenic effects.
However, the role of RhoGDI3 has not been studied in relation to cancer or to PDAC.
Despite the reduction in the expression of RhoGDI3 in PDAC, we found that RhoB was underexpressed while RhoG was overexpressed, suggesting that cancerous cells preserve their capacity to activate this pathway, thus these cells may be more eager to response to the stimuli needed to proliferate and become invasive unlike normal cells.
Surprisingly, we found nuclear localization of RhoGDI3 in non-cancerous pancreatic cell line and normal pancreatic tissue biopsies, which could open the possibility of novel nuclear functions for this protein, impacting gene expression regulation and cellular homeostasis.
The protein ARHGDIA has been found to play distinct roles in cancer progression for several tumors.
However, it remains elusive whether and how ARHGDIA plays functions in human glioma.
In this study, we discovered that ARHGDIA is much downregulated in human glioma; meanwhile, its expression negatively correlates with glioma malignancy and positively relates to prognosis of glioma patients.
It has independent predictive value of ARHGDIA expression level for overall survival of human glioma patients.
Glioma patients with ARHGDIA-positive expression have a longer overall survival time than ARHGDIA-negative patients.
ARHGDIA is a potential prognostic marker and therapeutic target for human glioma.
Furthermore, we demonstrated that ARHGDIA is a potential target of miR-151-5p and miR-16 in gliomas.
PCBP2 may facilitate miR-151-5p and miR-16 promotion of glioma cell migration and invasion through mitigating the function of ARHGDIA.
We report a case of hypopharyngeal cancer complicated by SIADH following chemotherapy.
Two AldR binding sites (O1 and O2) with the consensus sequence GA-N2-ATC-N2-TC and one putative AldR binding site with the sequence GA-N2-GTT-N2-TC were identified upstream of the ald gene.
When a phenotype of any food allergy was used for meta-analysis, the C11orf30 locus reached genome-wide significance (P = 7.50 x 10-11), whereas SNPs associated with ITGA6, ANGPT4, MMP12/MMP13, and EXOC4 and additional C11orf30 SNPs were suggestive (P &lt;= 1.49 x 10-6).
This study identifies multiple novel loci as risk factors for PA and food allergy and establishes C11orf30 as a risk locus for both PA and food allergy.
TAK-448 and TAK-683, investigational agents with potential utility in the treatment of prostate cancer, are potent low molecular weight metastin receptor agonists consisting of nine amino acids.
Thus, antagonists of GPR54 are expected to be novel drugs for sex-hormone dependent diseases such as prostate cancer or endometriosis.
Though antagonists of GPR54 are expected to be novel drugs for sex-hormone dependent diseases such as prostate cancer or endometriosis, small molecule GPR54 antagonists have not been reported.
Methanogenic archaea typically contain 5-hydroxybenzimidazolylcobamide (cba-HBI) as the prosthetic group of a number of methyltransferases involved in their central metabolic pathways.
In this paper the (acidic) dissociation constants and standard oxidation-reduction potentials of the Co3+/Co2+ and Co2+/Co1+ couples of isolated aquo-cba-HBI were measured.
The implications for the functioning of cba-HBI in biochemical methyl group transfer reactions are discussed.
Serum samples from patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) (n = 79), rheumatoid arthritis (RA) (n = 59), ankylosing spondylitis (AS) (n = 25), gout (n = 31), and normal controls (n = 99) were analyzed using ELISA for sCD4 detection.
To investigate the roles of soluble CD4 (sCD4) and CD8 (sCD8) in the severity of autoimmune thyroid diseases, we examined serum concentrations of sCD4 and sCD8 in various degrees of severity of Hashimoto's disease (HD) and Graves' disease (GD) by enzyme immunoassay.
The role of CD4 molecules in the autoimmune and lymphoproliferative syndrome caused by murine Fas mutations was studied using the novel systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) model, MRL-Fas(lpr(cg))/Fas(lprcg) (MRL-lpr(cg)) mice, in combination with the novel mutant CD4 gene producing soluble CD4 (sCD4) instead of membrane-bound CD4 (mCD4).
The results indicate that mCD4 is important and can not be replaced by sCD4 in full development of SLE-like manifestations, and suggest that CD4+ T cells may aggravate the autoimmune disease by stimulating autoreactive B cells to produce autoantibodies through their helper activity in Fas mutant models.
In a search for serum markers of disease activity in uveitis, we measured the levels of the soluble form of ICAM-1 (sICAM-1), CD4 (sCD4), CD8 (sCD8) and interleukin-2 receptor (sIL-2R) in the serum of patients with Behcet's disease (BD) and Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada's disease (VKH).
To examine 3 soluble circulating T cell antigens: interleukin 2 receptors (sIL-2r), CD4 (sCD4), and CD8 (sCD8) with von Willebrand factor antigen levels (vWF:Ag) and antiendothelial cell antibodies (AECA) as indices of endothelial involvement in patients with Wegener's granulomatosis (WG).
In an independent sample set, we identified 5 GIST cases lacking alterations in the KIT/PDGFRA/SDHx/RAS pathways, including two additional cases with FGFR1-TACC1 and ETV6-NTRK3 fusions.
Long-term silencing of CD133 by a lentiviral-based approach inhibited cancer cell-cycle progression and suppressed in vivo tumorigenicity by down-regulating expression of cytokinesis-related genes, such as TACC1, ACF7, and CKAP5.
No mutations were detected in AKT1 or BRAF, and the fusions FGFR1-TACC1, EML4-ALK, CCDC6-RET and KIF5B-RET were not found in any of the cancers.
We found that rats with diabetes had significantly higher abundance of the Protein disulfide isomerase associated 3, Aspartoacylase-3,3-hydroxymethyl-3-methylglutaryl-Coenzyme A lyase, Lactamase beta 2 and Agmat protein.
The transcription factor, Grainyhead-like 2 (GRHL2), is involved in wound healing, epidermal integrity, and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in various biological processes; however, the biological function of GRHL2 in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is unknown.
In the current study, we investigated the effect of GRHL2 on cell growth and migration in NSCLC cell lines and clinical tissues.
Immunohistochemical analysis of clinical NSCLC specimens revealed that patients with high GRHL2 expression were associated with poor prognosis compared to patients with low GRHL2 expression.
GRHL2 overexpression promoted cell growth and colony formation, and simultaneously suppressed cell migration in NSCLC cells.
These findings confirm that GRHL2 plays an important role in regulating cell proliferation and migration in NSCLC.
Bone metastases (BoM) are a significant cause of morbidity in patients with estrogen receptor-positive (ER-positive) breast cancer; yet, characterizations of human specimens are limited.
ecRNA-seq was then applied on a longitudinal collection of 11 primary breast cancers and patient-matched synchronous or recurrent BoMs.
The mammalian homologs of the D. melanogaster Grainyhead gene, Grainyhead-like 1-3 (GRHL1, GRHL2 and GRHL3), are transcription factors implicated in wound healing, tubulogenesis and cancer.
GRHL2 colocalized with AR in prostate tumors and was frequently amplified and upregulated in prostate cancer.
Importantly, GRHL2 maintained AR expression in multiple prostate cancer model systems, was required for cell proliferation, enhanced AR's transcriptional activity, and colocated with AR at specific sites on chromatin to regulate genes relevant to disease progression.
However, the reports on grainyhead-like 2 in various cancers are controversial.
In this review, we summarized recent progress on grainyhead-like 2 in development and cancer in order to get an insight into the regulation network of grainyhead-like 2 and understand the roles of grainyhead-like 2 in various cancers.
Here, we developed a method comprising the miR-200 family and grainyhead-like 2 (GRHL2) to mimic this MET-like phenomenon observed in sarcoma patient samples.We sequentially express GRHL2 and the miR-200 family using cell transduction and transfection, respectively, to better understand the molecular underpinnings of these phenotypic transitions in sarcoma cells.
Strong evidence was also found in the literature for the candidate associations detected between Cystic fibrosis disorder and the PPIs between the CFTR_HUMAN, DERL1_HUMAN, RNF5_HUMAN, AHSA1_HUMAN and GOPC_HUMAN proteins, and between the CHIP_HUMAN and HSP7C_HUMAN proteins.
This strategy was applied to generate a cell-permeable peptide substrate for real-time detection of intracellular caspase activities during apoptosis and an inhibitor for the CFTR-associated ligand (CAL) PDZ domain as a potential treatment for cystic fibrosis.
GOPC (FIG/PIST/CAL) is a PDZ-domain scaffolding protein that regulates the trafficking of a wide array of proteins, including small GTPases, receptors and cell surface molecules such as cadherin 23 and cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator.
In addition, among patients who are not carriers of the CYP2C19 loss-of-function alleles, there is a reduced risk of stroke when clopidogrel is taken with aspirin compared to aspirin alone.
To compare the efficacy and safety of antiplatelet agents for the secondary prevention of ischemic stroke based on cytochrome P450 2C19 (CYP2C19) polymorphisms.
In patients with a poor CYP2C19 genotype for clopidogrel metabolism (n=484), the risk of recurrent stroke among those who received triflusal treatment was 2.9% per year, which was not significantly different from those who received clopidogrel treatment (2.2% per year; hazard ratio [HR], 1.23; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.60-2.53).
The risk of recurrent stroke in patients with a good CYP2C19 genotype was 1.6% per year, which was not significantly different from those with a poor genotype (2.2% per year; HR, 0.69; 95% CI, 0.26-1.79).
Whilst there were no significant differences between the treatment groups in the rates of stroke recurrence, major vascular events, or coronary revascularization, the efficacy of antiplatelet agents for the secondary prevention of stroke according to CYP2C19 genotype status remains unclear.
PPCD endothelium was completely negative for CK2e, CK9, CK15, and CK20.
Mutations in CDC14 may have been recovered in the screen because Cdc14p may reduce the cyclin B (Clb)-associated Cdc28 kinase activity in late mitosis, and Cln2p may normally activate Clb-Cdc28 kinase activity by related mechanisms.
The clb2 cdc14 strains arrested with replicated but unseparated DNA and unseparated spindle pole bodies; this phenotype is distinct from the late mitotic arrest of the sic1::TRP1 cdc14-1 and the cdc14-1 hct1::LEU2 double mutants and of the cdc14 CLN2 overexpressor.
In this study, we found that refractoriness to ultraviolet (UVC) light-induced cell death was increased in UVC-radiation-sensitive cells derived from Cockayne syndrome patients when the cells were precultured in medium supplemented with recombinant annexin II (rANX II).
In CS3BES cells, an immortal cell line derived from Cockayne syndrome patients, the rANX II supplementation-induced UVC-radiation resistance was suppressed by treatment with an anti-annexin II antibody and EGTA.
Five polymorphisms had significant influence (P &lt; .05): SNPs in the ANXA2, TGFBR3, and TEK genes were associated with increased stroke risk, whereas Alfa-thalassemia and a SNP in the ADCY9 gene were linked with decreased stroke risk.
This review focuses on the regulatory mechanism behind annexin A2-S100A10 complex formation, its role in regulating chloride transport in health and cystic fibrosis and the potential of this mechanism to integrate calcium and cAMP signalling in airway epithelia.
In contrast, the expression level of the proteins did not show a significant change at 9 weeks, but this increased to 3-fold at 30 weeks for carbonic anhydrase VII, ras related protein Rab 6, Annexin A2, neurofibromatosis type 2 and aldehyde dehydrogenase.
The antibody levels of HAV-IgG of Group A and B in 2, 4 and 12 weeks of vaccination and of Group C were higher than that of Group D. After 12 weeks of vaccination, the antibody level of group B became higher than it was Group C. There were no differences on safety among domestic live attenuated hepatitis A vaccine, domestic inactivated hepatitis A vaccine or imported inactivated hepatitis A vaccine under routine or emergency vaccination.
Influenza A(H3N2) predominated in 14 (56%) of the 25 years, seasonal influenza A(H1N1) in 7 (28%), and influenza B in 2 (8%), and in 2 years multiple types cocirculated.
Immunofluorescence test confirmed infection with influenza type A in 39 patients, while with type B--in 2 patients.
As a result of virologic studies, adenovirus from the conjunctiva of one patient was obtained; immunofluorescent studies were positive in 11 patients (virus of grip B in 2, of paragrippe in 1, adenovirus in 4, RS virus in 3, mixed virus infection in 1 patient).
Positive serologic reactions were observed in 22 patients (virus of grip A in 7, of grip B in 2, of paragrippe in 1, RS virus in 1, mixed virus infection in 11 persons).
CKD (estimated glomerular filtration rate [eGFR &lt;60 mls/min) was found in 117 participants (26%).
Inclusion criteria include being an Aboriginal Australian, having CKD (a. on dialysis; b. eGFR levels of &lt; 60 mls/min/1.73 m(2) (CKD Stages 3 to 5); c. ACR &gt;= 30 mg/mmol irrespective of eGFR (CKD Stages 1 and 2); d. diabetes plus albuminuria (ACR &gt;= 3 mg/mmol) irrespective of eGFR), having moderate or severe periodontal disease, having at least 12 teeth, and living in Central Australia for the 2-year study duration.
Progression of CKD will be defined by time to the development of the first of: (1) new development of macroalbuminuria; (2) 30 % loss of baseline eGFR; (3) progression to end stage kidney disease defined by eGFR &lt; 15 mLs/min/1.73 m(2); (4) progression to end stage kidney disease defined by commencement of renal replacement therapy.
The authors would also like to highlight recent guidance on atorvastatin as the statin of choice in patients with chronic kidney disease, and of the need for dose adjustment in those with an estimated glomerular filtration rate less than 30 mLs/min/1.73 m^2.
We recruit pregnant women into LPG, efficient cookstove, and control arms and track birth weight and physician-assessed severe pneumonia incidence in the first year of life.
Serum ApoE was markedly increased in cases with bacterial infections including sepsis, bacterial meningitis, and bacterial pneumonia, compared to healthy controls.
No significantly elevated serum ApoE levels were observed in aseptic meningitis patients or mycoplasma pneumonia patients.
An earlier study from this laboratory suggested that some relationship exists between apolipoprotein E4 (apoE4), the product of the epsilon4 allele, and the pathobiology of C. pneumoniae.
These observations indicate that apoE4 enhances attachment of C. pneumoniae EB, but not those of C. trachomatis, to target host cells.
APOE4+ patients were younger (53.2 +/- 21.9 vs. 65.4 +/- 13.4, p = .08) and less often admitted for pneumonia (0% vs. 29.3%, p = .05) compared with APOE4- patients, yet they had a duration of delirium that was twice as long: median (interquartile range), 4 (3, 4.5) vs. 2 (1, 4) days (p = .05).
Using multivariable regression analysis to adjust for age, admission diagnosis of sepsis or acute respiratory distress syndrome or pneumonia, severity of illness, and duration of coma, the presence of APOE4 allele was the strongest predictor of delirium duration (odds ratio, 7.32; 95% confidence interval, 1.82-29.51, p = .005).
This study examined the effect of olanzapine on key molecules of the histaminergic system, including histidine decarboxylase (HDC), H1 receptor (H1R) and H3 receptor (H3R), in the brain at different stages of olanzapine-induced obesity.
We found that the lack of endogenous histamine in NOD HDC(-/-) mice decreased the incidence of diabetes in relation to their wild-type counterpart.
In this review, we have highlighted the role that histamine, histidine decarboxylase (HDC), histamine receptors and mast cells (the main source of histamine in the body) play during both pancreatitis and pancreatic cancer.
With aging, blood glucose levels in HDC-KO mice were shifted towards values characteristic of diabetes.
One of the likely explanations may be that in the chain of events in HDC-KO mice on the one hand and in Streptozotocin-induced diabetes on the other hand, leading to the alterations in the heart electrophysiological parameters, there is a common link.
Therefore, a study of diabetes-related immune processes was considered of interest in histidine decarboxylase knockout (HDC-KO) mice.
The aim of our study was i) to characterize antibody production in response to vaccination with p277 or hsp65 in wild type (WT) BALB/c and HDC-KO mice, and ii) to establish a possible correlation between vaccination and the changes in the pattern of STZ diabetes.
Vaccination with p277 and hsp65 altered the pattern of STZ diabetes both in HDC-KO and WT animals, characterized by a transient increase followed by sustained reduction of blood sugar levels as compared to controls.
Multiple low-doses of STZ were able to induce diabetes in HDC-KO mice and the development of diabetes was prevented by vaccination with hsps.
The purpose of the study was to determine whether there are different patterns of retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) thinning as measured by spectral domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) for 4 subtypes of open angle glaucoma (OAG): primary OAG (POAG), normal tension glaucoma (NTG), pseudoexfoliation glaucoma (PXG), and pigmentary glaucoma (PDG) and to compare them with normal controls.
To assess the use of a computerized program for evaluating the amount of trabecular meshwork (TM) pigmentation in normal (control), primary open-angle glaucoma (POAG), and pseudoexfoliation glaucoma/pigmentary dispersion glaucoma (PXFG/PDG) patients.
We analyzed primary open-angle glaucoma (POAG), pseudoexfoliation glaucoma (PEX), and pigmentary glaucoma (PDG).
In this study, we aimed to evaluate to the utility of aberrant promoter hypermethylation for detection in a panel of 10 genes (KIF1A, EDNRB, CDH4, TERT, CD44, NISCH, PAK3, VGF, MAL and FKBP4) in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) via a candidate gene approach.
Consecutive patients with type 1 diabetes were genotyped for single-nucleotide polymorphisms in or near the genes for the Beta1 and Beta2 adrenergic receptor (ADRB1, ADRB2), SORCS1, and BNC2, and for the insertion/deletion polymorphism in the ACE gene.
In peripheral blood mononuclear cells isolated from streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats, Beta2AR agonists inhibited diabetes-induced tumor necrosis factor-Alfa production, which was prevented by co-treatment with a selective Beta2AR blocker.
In conclusion, these findings indicated that the ADRB2 SNPs might be a genetic risk factor for dyslipidemia in the Chinese hypertensive patients.
These studies elucidate a novel mechanism by which hyperinsulinemia contributes to heart failure by increasing PDE4D expression and identify Beta2AR or GRK2 as plausible therapeutic targets for preventing or treating heart failure in subjects with type 2 DM.
Beta-2 Adrenergic receptor (AR) agonists have been reported to diminish nocturnal hypoglycemia; however, whether long-acting inhaled Beta-2 AR agonists could potentially be used to treat or prevent hypoglycemia has not been established.
Seven patients with type 1 diabetes and seven healthy control subjects received inhaled formoterol (48 myg), a highly specific Beta-2 AR agonist, or a placebo during a hyperinsulinemic-hypoglycemic clamp study to evaluate its capacity to antagonize the effect of insulin.
Inhalation of the Beta-2 AR-specific agonist formoterol may be useful in the prevention or treatment of acute hypoglycemia and thus may help patients with type 1 diabetes achieve optimal glucose control more safely.
IRF4 distinguished opposing glycemic responses to different types of peptidoglycan and was required for MDP/NOD2-induced insulin sensitization and lower metabolic tissue inflammation during obesity and endotoxemia.
IRF4 was dispensable for exacerbated glucose intolerance via NOD1.
IRF4 is a unique member of the interferon regulatory factor (IRF) family playing critical regulatory roles in immune cell development, regulation of obesity-induced inflammation, and control of thermogenic gene expression.
Genetic deletion of IRF4 has been shown to suppress autoimmune disease in several mouse models, but its role in autoimmune diabetes in NOD mice remains unknown.
To address the role of IRF4 in the pathogenesis of autoimmune diabetes in NOD mice, we generated IRF4-knockout NOD mice and investigated the impact of the genetic deletion of IRF4 on diabetes, insulitis and insulin autoantibody; the effector function of T cells in vivo and in vitro; and the proportion of dendritic cell subsets.
However, diabetes and autoantibody production were completely suppressed in both heterozygous and homozygous IRF4-deficient NOD mice.
These results suggest that the levels of IRF4 in T cells and dendritic cells are important for the pathogenesis of diabetes in NOD mice.
Our findings suggest that an IRF4-targeted strategy might be useful for modulating autoimmunity in type 1 diabetes.
Of these, 1,088 (19.7%) underwent procedures for neurogenic bowel, including 957 (17.3%) ACE/cecostomy tube and 155 (2.8%) ileostomy/colostomy patients.
We aim to determine the natural history of the ACE in idiopathic constipation and factors predictive of closure.
A retrospective case-note review of all patients undergo ACE formation for idiopathic constipation Jan 2003-Mar 2016.
The ACE survival curve estimates the proportion of patients with idiopathic constipation who can expect closure (either due to success or failure) at certain timepoints.
Sacral nerve stimulation (SNS) can be beneficial for children with constipation, but no studies have focused on children with constipation severe enough to require antegrade continence enemas (ACEs).
Our objective was to evaluate the efficacy of SNS in children with constipation treated with ACE.
In children with severe constipation dependent on ACE, SNS led to a steady decrease in ACE usage with nearly half of patients receiving cecostomy/appendicostomy closure within 2years.
(2) IL10-/-colitis Piroxicam (200 ppm) was administered orally in feed to 5-week-old IL-10-/-mice (C57BL/6J background) for 14 days followed by enalaprilat (ACE-I), CCG-203025 or PBS administered transanally for 14 days.
This study demonstrated the therapeutic efficacy of both ACE-I and AT1aR-A for preventing the development of both acute and immunologically relevant colitis.
Gold standard in Hirschsprung disease (HD) diagnosis is rectal suction biopsy (RSB) with hematoxylin and eosin and acetylcholinesterase (ACE) stainings.
Most of the data pertaining to antegrade continence enema (the ACE or Malone procedure) comes from the pediatric literature in the management of children with AI, but also with supervening chronic constipation, where the quality of life and compliance with this technique appears superior to retrograde colonic washouts.
For the article titled "Treatment Recommendations Following 3-Day Masked Continuous Glucose Monitoring (CGM) in Youth With Type 1 Diabetes" published in the month of May in the Journal of Diabetes Science and Technology, 2014;8(3):494-497, doi:10.1177/1932296814528135, the authors neglected to include an affiliation for first author Lisa E. Rasbach, MSN.
We used cell proliferation and apoptosis assays in sarcoma cell lines and benign cells; Gamma-H2AX expression, comet assay, immunoblot analyses and drug combination studies in vitro and in patient derived xenograft (PDX) models.
Their functional involvement was addressed by HSP90 inhibition, which preferentially sensitized radioresistant sarcoma cells and was accompanied by delayed Gamma-H2AX foci clearance and HSP90 client protein degradation.
Bladder cancer-associated protein (BLCAP) is a novel candidate tumor suppressor gene identified from human bladder carcinoma and highly associated with the invasion of bladder cancer.
Bladder cancer-associated protein (BLCAP) is a highly conserved protein among species, and it is considered a novel candidate tumor suppressor gene originally identified from human bladder carcinoma.
Bladder cancer-associated protein gene (BLCAP) is a novel candidate tumor suppressor gene identified from the human bladder carcinoma.
The results indicate that ghrelin exerted an antinociceptive effect, which was mediated via TRPV1/opioid systems, in IBS-induced visceral hypersensitivity.
Taken together, our results implicate TRPA1 and TRPV1 channels as potential pharmacological targets to address the 7-DHC-induced hypersensitivity to light in patients.
In conclusion, WFM alleviated CCI-induced mechanical allodynia and thermal hypersensitivity via modulating TRPV1.
The single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs13438494 in intron 24 of PCLO was significantly associated with bipolar disorder in a meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies.
Of these, one SNP (rs13438494), in an intron of the piccolo (PCLO) gene, was significantly associated with bipolar disorder (FDR adjusted p &lt; .05) in the meta-analysis of GWAS.
These results support the previous findings implicating PCLO in mood disorders and demonstrate the utility of combining gene expression and genetic variation data to improve our understanding of the genetic contribution to bipolar disorder.
Methylation profiles of AGTR1, GALR1, SLC5A8, ZMYND10 and NTSR1, could be an effective methylation-based assay for NSCLC diagnosis.
Zinc-finger, MYND-type containing 10 (ZMYND10), or more commonly called BLU, expression is frequently downregulated in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) and many other tumors due to promoter hypermethylation.
A possible mechanism of BLU in chemoresistance was investigated in ovarian cancer cell lines by in vitro apoptotic assays.
In vitro studies have shown that BLU could upregulate the expression of BAX and enhance the effect of paclitaxel-induced apoptosis in ovarian cancer cells.
Our study suggested that methylation of BLU could be a potential prognostic biomarker for advanced ovarian serous carcinoma.
Mutations in connexins expressed in the cochlear epithelium, Cx26 and Cx30, cause sensorineural deafness and in the case of Cx26, is one of the most common causes of non-syndromic, hereditary deafness.
Although hundreds of genes have been reported to be associated with nonsyndromic hearing loss (NSHL), GJB2, GJB6, SLC26A4, and mitochondrial (mt) MT-RNR1 and MTTS are the major contributors.
Alterations in genes frequently associated with nonsyndromic hearing loss in the Brazilian population, including connexin 26 (GJB2), connexin 30 (GJB6) and mitochondrial 12 S rRNA (m.A1555 G mutation), were not found.
Canine X-linked progressive retinal atrophy (XLPRA) is a hereditary, progressive retinal degeneration that has been mapped previously to the canine X chromosome in a region flanked by the dystrophin (DMD) and tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase 1 (TIMP1) genes, and is tightly linked to the gene RPGR.
By typing the XLPRA pedigree with five intragenic markers [dystrophin, retinitis pigmentosa GTPase regulator ( RPGR ), tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases 1, androgen receptor and factor IX], we established a linkage map of the canine X chromosome, and confirmed that the order of these five genes is identical to that on the human X. XLPRA was tightly linked to an intragenic RPGR polymorphism (LOD 11.7, zero recombination), thus confirming locus homology with RP3.
At this location the dystrophin/dystroglycan complex may play a role in the attachment of the retina to the vitreous, and, under pathological conditions, in traction-induced retinal detachment.
The aim of this study was to examine the possible association between advanced fibrosis and IGF-I and IGFBP-1 in NAFLD.
This pilot study suggests an association between serum IGFBP-1 and IGF-I levels with advanced fibrosis in NAFLD patients.
Numerous studies have shown that impairments of the hepatic growth hormone/insulin-like growth factor-1 axis (GH/IGF-1) are common in patients with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, chronic viral hepatitis, liver cirrhosis, and chronic cholestatic liver disease.
It has also been demonstrated that a decrease in the GH insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) axis is closely associated with the progression of general NAFLD, suggesting a physiological role of these hormones for the maintenance of the liver.
The aim of the present study was to clarify the relationship between the histological severity of NAFLD and production of the GH/insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) axis.
Results With respect to the stage of fibrosis in patients with NAFLD, the serum GH levels were higher and the serum IGFBP-3 levels and IGF-1:SDSs were lower in patients with cirrhosis (grade F4 fibrosis) than in patients grade F1-F3 fibrosis; moreover, these differences were statistically significant (all p&lt;0.01).
Conclusion Increased GH levels and decreased IGF-1 and IGFBP-3 levels might contribute to the progression of NAFLD.
The GH/IGF-1 axis may be important in the development of NAFLD, but not in patients with HCV-related CLD.
Growing evidence suggests that growth hormone (GH) and insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) may have roles in the development and progression of NAFLD.
Low serum IGF-1 levels are associated with increased histologic severity of NAFLD when rigorously controlled for age, BMI, the presence of diabetes, and after the exclusion of subjects with cirrhosis.
Further investigation is warranted to determine the differential effects of GH and IGF-1 on the development and progression of NAFLD, which could further elucidate pathophysiology and identify therapeutic targets.
Idiopathic hypoparathyroidism, inadequate secretion of parathyroid hormone of unknown etiology, may mimic ankylosing spondylitis both clinically and radiologically.
121 consecutive pts (85 rheumatoid arthritis (RA), 22 psoriatic arthritis (PSA), 14 ankylosing spondylitis (AS)) underwent clinical and laboratory evaluation which included kidney and liver function tests, serum calcium and phosphor levels, 25(OH)D and parathyroid hormone (PTH).
Elevated expression of the activating FcGamma receptor (FcGammaR) I and FcGammaRIIa together with decreased expression of the inhibitory FcGammaRIIb are involved in the pathogenesis of primary immune thrombocytopenia (ITP).
Thrombocytopenia was induced in FcGammaRIIb-deficient mice on B6;129S, C57BL/6, and BALB/C backgrounds, as well as splenectomized mice and control mice by platelet (PLT) antibody.
Anti-CD44 is ineffective at inhibiting thrombocytopenia in B6;129S FcGammaRIIb-deficient mice but, like IVIG, is effective in splenectomized mice and FcGammaRIIb-deficient mice on the BALB/C and C57BL/6 background.
L-selectin(-/-) mice and L-selectin(-/-) ICAM-1(-/-) mice developed significantly less severe myositis compared to wild-type mice, while ICAM-1 deficiency did not inhibit the development of myositis.
L-selectin(-/-) mice that received wild-type T cells developed myositis.
Aberrant expression of SSTR1 has been implicated in several human diseases, including pseudotumor cerebri, and oncogenic osteomalacia.
Spinal muscular atrophy with progressive myoclonic epilepsy (SMA-PME), a rare disorder caused by mutation in the ASAH1 gene, is characterized by progressive muscle weakness and intractable epilepsy.
Mutations of N-acylsphingosine amidohydrolase 1 are known to separately cause Farber disease (arthritis, subcutaneous nodules, and dysphonia) or SMA with progressive myoclonic epilepsy.
A rare syndrome characterized by lower motor neuron disease associated with progressive myoclonic epilepsy, referred to as "spinal muscular atrophy associated with progressive myoclonic epilepsy" (SMA-PME), has been described in childhood and is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait.
Recent research has revealed that deficiency of the same enzyme is responsible for a rare form of spinal muscular atrophy associated with myoclonic epilepsy (SMA-PME).
ASAH1 variants cause both the severe and early-onset Farber disease and rare cases of spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) with progressive myoclonic epilepsy (SMA-PME), phenotypically characterized by childhood onset of proximal muscle weakness and atrophy due to spinal motor neuron degeneration followed by occurrence of severe and intractable myoclonic seizures and death in the teenage years.
This study describes for the first time the association between ASAH1 variants and an adult SMA phenotype with no myoclonic epilepsy nor death in early age, thus expanding the phenotypic spectrum of ASAH1-related SMA.
Spinal muscular atrophy with progressive myoclonic epilepsy (SMA-PME) is an extremely rare disorder related to the lysosomal storage disease, Farber lipogranulomatosis.
Farber disease is associated with joint deformities, lipomatous skin nodules, and often is fatal by 2-3 years of age; while SMA-PME is characterized by childhood-onset motor neuron disease and progressive myoclonic epilepsy.
The combination of motor neuron disease and progressive myoclonic epilepsy should prompt genetic evaluation of ASAH1.
The enzymatic activity was first identified over four decades ago and is deficient in two rare inherited disorders, Farber lipogranulomatosis (Farber disease) and spinal muscular atrophy with myoclonic epilepsy (SMA-PME).
To present the clinical features and the results of laboratory investigations in three patients with spinal muscular atrophy associated with progressive myoclonic epilepsy (SMA-PME), a rare condition caused by mutations in the N-acylsphingosine amidohydrosilase 1 (ASAH1) gene.
These results suggest that the eosinophil number may be regulated by different mechanisms in W/W(v) and +/+ mice, and that the effect of SUN-C8257 on nematode-induced eosinophilia is probably due to chymase inhibition.
Chymase released by activated mast cells may play a role in helminth-induced eosinophilia.
Injection of chymase provoked marked neutrophilia and eosinophilia in the skin of Dunkin Hartley guinea-pigs.
The patient presented as a 53yo man with a left upper quadrant mass and synchronous metastases to the spleen and liver (pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor T4N0M1, Stage IV), which were resected (CD56-, synaptophysin+, chromogranin+, Ki-67&lt;1%).
Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were negative for CD117, and CD34, but positive for chromogranin, synaptophysin, and CD56 with a 6% Ki-67 index, consistent with a spindle cell-type well differentiated neuroendocrine tumor, World Health Organization (WHO) Grade 2.
Recent studies have reported low or absent expression of CD56 in papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) and its presence in normal thyroid tissue, benign thyroid lesions, and most follicular non-PTC tumors.
Posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES) is a clinic-radiologic entity characterized with temporary vasogenic edema developing typically in posterior circulation of the brain and has been reported as a rare manifestation of IgAV.
Serum complement (C3, C4 and CH50), immunoglobulins (IgG, IgM and IgA) and C-reactive protein (CRP) were evaluated in 40 patients with anti-NMDAR encephalitis and 40 controls.
ACE-III was administered to 70 patients with Alzheimer disease, 31 patients with behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia, and a control group of 139 healthy volunteers.
While higher out-of-pocket costs were incurred at hospital visits, more people with ACE visited hospitals than clinics for epilepsy care.
Additionally, patients with migraine had greater incidence of homozygous mutations for procoagulant genes (MTHFR (C677T), PAI-1 and ACE I/D) than expected.
We did this study to see whether an association exists between ACE gene I/D polymorphism and migraine in our region.
We were not able to find a statistically significant association between ACE gene I/D polymorphism with migraine.
The expression of angiopietin-like protein 2 (Angptl2) markedly increased in the neovascularized corneas compared to the normal cornea, and Angtpl2 was(a potent inducer of inflammatory corneal neovascularization.
Angptl2 mRNA expression and corneal neovascularization were inhibited in a mouse alkari injury model by topical application of this agent.
The aim of our study was to investigate the target relationship between miR-143 and mitogen-activated protein kinase 1 (MAPK1) and explore the effect of miR-143 on the endometrial cancers (EC) cells through targeting MAPK1.
We have identified a subset of miRNAs (miR-142-3p, miR-143-3p, miR-145-5p, miR-150-5p, miR-223-3p, miR-451a, miR-486-5p, miR-605-5p) that are enriched in lung adenocarcinoma extracellular vesicles compared to the donor cells from which they were derived.
Two well-known tumor suppressors, miR-143-3p and miR-145-5p, were also enriched in serum samples collected during surgery from blood vessels draining directly from lung adenocarcinoma tumor beds.
We show that the transfer of miR-143-3p and miR-145-5p within extracellular vesicles from lung adenocarcinoma cells to endothelial cells reduces the levels of CAMK1D and increases tube formation by endothelial cells.
UCA1 negatively regulated miR-143 expression in a dose-dependent manner in bladder cancer cells.
In addition, UCA1 and HMGB1 were upregulated and miR-143 was downregulated in bladder cancer specimens.
Overall, the data suggested that UCA1 may promote the invasion and EMT of bladder cancer cells by regulating the miR-143/HMGB1 pathway, which exhibits an important regulatory role in the pathology of bladder cancer.
The circulating serum miR-143 level may be a novel, non-invasive predictive marker of a response to nCRT in locally advanced rectal cancer patients.
Here, we investigate the functional properties and expression of the miR-143/145 cluster in breast cancer (BC) in vitro and in vivo.
In this randomized controlled trial after 2 weeks of a run-in period on an isocaloric diet, 42 premenopausal women with central obesity were randomly assigned into two groups: (1) Hypocaloric diet enriched in legumes (HDEL) and (2) hypocaloric diet without legumes (HDWL) for 6 weeks.
We aimed to discover if L-arginine and selenium alone or together can increase the effect of a hypocaloric diet enriched in legumes (HDEL) on central obesity and cardiovascular risk factors in women with central obesity.
These data indicate the beneficial effects of L-arginine on central obesity, selenium on insulin resistance and HDEL on serum concentrations of NO(x) and TG.
The study indicates that HDEL + Arg + selenium reduce suprailiac skinfold thicknesses which represents the abdominal obesity reduction.
We have previously demonstrated that multiple sclerosis (MS) patients have abnormal cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) levels of the key myelin-related molecules cobalamin (Cbl), epidermal growth factor (EGF), and normal cellular prions (PrP(C)s), thus confirming that some CSF abnormalities may be co-responsible for remyelination failure.
We also searched for ERBB2 transmembrane mutations in various types of cancers in PubMed, The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), and the Memorial Sloan Kettering-Integrated Mutation Profiling of Actionable Cancer Targets (MSK-IMPACT) database.
In addition, MSK-IMPACT allowed identification of three additional urothelial carcinomas with G660D mutations and two lung adenocarcinomas with V659E mutations.
A greater proportion of MSK radiologists with &gt;5 years' experience provided responses that were discordant with the ISSVA classification compared with less experienced radiologists (0-5 years) in diagnosing hemangiomas in adult patients (P = 0.02), and using the presence of phleboliths to diagnose hemangiomas (P = 0.004).
Large genomic datasets of NSCLC [MSK-IMPACT(TM) dataset at MSKCC (n=2004), TCGA combined lung cancer dataset (n=1144)] were analyzed to define concurrent mutations and clinical features of RASA1-mutated NSCLCs.
Here in one rare case of undifferentiated cardiac intimal sarcoma (IS), a next-generation sequencing based assay, MSK-IMPACT (Memorial Sloan Kettering - Integrated Mutation Profiling of Actionable Cancer Targets), identified a somatic, activating mutation in PDGFRB, along with amplification of PDGFRA.
DNA samples extracted from each tumor and matched normal tissue were subjected to targeted massively parallel sequencing using the Memorial Sloan Kettering-Integrated Mutation Profiling of Actionable Cancer Targets (MSK-IMPACT) assay.
We analyzed production of ovalbumin (OVA)-specific IgE and nose-scratching symptoms in Lckd-Phf11-Tg mice using an OVA-induced allergic rhinitis model.
In an allergic rhinitis model, Lckd-Phf11-Tg mice showed a significant increase in the production of OVA-specific IgE and the frequency of nose scratching.
We showed that ANXA10 mRNA was expressed in adult liver and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), but not in multiple adult and fetal tissues, cholangiocarcinoma, and several other common carcinomas.
These results suggest that S1P5 agonism is an innovative approach with potential benefit in neurodegenerative disorders involving lipid imbalance and/or compromised blood-brain barrier such as Alzheimer's disease or multiple sclerosis.
Exposure of A549 human lung carcinoma, ZR-75, MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 human breast cancer and B16-F10 mouse melanoma cells to hypoxia increased Rab5 activation, followed by its re-localization to the leading edge and association with focal adhesions.
Immunohistochemistry of Rab5a was performed in human specimens of bone metastasis and pair-matched breast carcinoma; the autophagic-molecular mechanisms affected by Rab5a were evaluated in human 1833 bone metastatic cells, derived from breast-carcinoma MDA-MB231 cells.
Immunohistochemistry verified RAB5A was upregulated in breast cancer tissues.
Therefore, the data reported here demonstrate that miR-130a is an important tumor suppressor in breast cancer, and imply that miR-130a/RAB5A axis have potential as therapeutic targets for breast cancer.
We report that overexpression of the GTPase RAB5A, a master regulator of endocytosis, is predictive of aggressive behavior and metastatic ability in human breast cancers.
To investigate the expression of Rab5a and APPL1 in breast cancer and fibroma, and analyze their correlation with HER-2 expression, metastasis and development of breast cancer.
Rab5a and APPL1 in paraffin embedded tissues of 74 breast carcinomas and 40 breast fibromas were detected by immunohistochemistry.
There was no expression or low expression of Rab5a and APPL1 in the breast fibroma, but the positive expression rate of Rab5a and APPL1 in the breast carcinomas were 91.9% and 83.8%, respectively.
Rab5a and APPL1 are overexpressed in breast cancer, and are positively correlated with the HER-2 expression.
A recent study suggested that SLC35F3 which encoded a thiamine transporter was a new candidate gene for hypertension.
The goal of this study was to investigate the association between the single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the SLC35F3 gene and hypertension in a Chinese population.
We found eight genetic variants in the coding regions of SLC35F3 and subsequently genotyped a non-synonymous variant rs34032258 (C &gt; G) in 1060 hypertension patients and 1467 controls.
In conclusion, we found that the rs34032258 in the SLC35F3 gene was associated with high blood pressure and may increase the risk of hypertension.
After chip hybridization and calculation of relative allele scores, the peak associations were typed in individual samples, revealing an association between hypertension, systolic BP, and diastolic BP and the previously uncharacterized solute carrier SLC35F3.
In twin pairs, the SLC35F3 risk allele predicted heritable cardiovascular traits previously associated with thiamine deficiency, including elevated cardiac stroke volume with decreased vascular resistance, and elevated pressor responses to environmental (cold) stress.
Allelic expression imbalance confirmed that cis variation at the human SLC35F3 locus influenced expression of that gene, and the allelic expression imbalance peak coincided with the hypertension peak.
LARG (leukemia-associated Rho guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF)), PDZ-RhoGEF, and p115RhoGEF augmented interaction between activated GAlfa13 and R7-RGS heterotrimers, indicating that these effector RhoGEFs can engage GAlfa13*R7-RGS complexes.
ARHGEF11 variants are reported to be associated with a higher risk for the onset of schizophrenia in a Japanese population; however, how ARHGEF11 contributes to the pathogenesis of schizophrenia in dendritic spines is unknown.
The metastatic behavior exhibited by ovarian cancer cells overe-xpressing ETAR is now explained by the interplay with Beta-arrestin1 (Beta-arr1), a scaffold protein acting as signal-integrating module of RhoC and cofilin signaling for specific invadopodia formation, accomplished by its interaction with a Rho guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF), PDZ-RhoGEF, in a G-protein independent manner.
PDZ-RhoGEF-deficient mice were protected from diet-induced obesity and T2D.
Our results demonstrate that PDZ-RhoGEF acts as a key determinant of mammalian metabolism and obesity-associated pathologies.
Previously, genetic analyses identified that variants in Arhgef11 may influence kidney injury in the Dahl salt-sensitive (S) rat, a model of hypertensive chronic kidney disease.
The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of the modified Nissen fundoplication after resection of adenocarcinoma from the esophagogastric junction (AEG) on controlling the reflux and the role of duodenogastroesophageal reflux (DGER) and cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) expression level in the remnant esophagus.
COX-2 up-regulation as well as high prevalence of esophagitis were observed in simultaneous acid reflux and DGER (p &lt; 0.05).
These results stand for a close relationship between progression of initial steps of gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) and COX-2, proliferative activity and EGF/VEGF expression and could have implications in GERD treatment in order to prevent its neoplastic evolution.
We therefore evaluated whether EGFR, ASAP1, ERBB2 and ERBB4, which signal downstream after ligation of EGF, and which show aberrant expression in several other invasive cancers, would also predict HBL tumor invasiveness.
Immunohistochemistry of HBL tumors (n = 60), which are histologically heterogeneous, shows that compared with well-differentiated fetal cells, less differentiated embryonal and undifferentiated small cells (SCU) progressively lose EGFR and ASAP1 expression.
Loss of EGFR-ASAP1 signaling characterizes undifferentiated and invasive HBL.
In colorectal cancers, a splicing variant of FIR that lacks exon2 (FIRDeltaexon2) is overexpressed as a dominant negative form of FIR.
In this study, to reveal the presence and the significance of anti-FIRs (FIR/FIRDeltaexon2) antibodies in cancers were explored in the sera of colorectal and other cancer patients.
Anti-FIRs antibodies were surely detected in the preoperative sera of 28 colorectal cancer patients (32.2% of positive rates), and the detection rate was significantly higher than that in healthy control sera (Mann-Whitney U test, p &lt; 0.01).
Anti-FIRs antibodies were detected in the sera of early-stage and/or recurrent colon cancer patients in which anti-p53 antibodies, CEA, and CA19-9 were not detected as well as in the sera of other cancer patients.
In conclusions, the combination of anti-FIRs antibodies with other clinically available tumor markers further improved the specificity and accuracy of cancer diagnosis.
Because over-expression of DNA-interacting far upstream element binding protein (FBP) supports non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) migration, we asked whether its repressor, FBP-interacting repressor (FIR) is functionally inactivated and how FIR might affect NSCLC cell biology.
Different FIR splice variants were highly expressed in the majority of NSCLCs, with the highest levels in tumours carrying genomic gains of chromosome 8q24.3, which contained the FIR gene locus.
Nuclear FIR expression was significantly enriched at the invasion front of primary NSCLCs, but this did not correlate with tumour cell proliferation.
In summary, by using scale-spanning data derived from primary human tissues, quantitative cellular analyses and mathematical modelling, we have demonstrated that concomitant over-expression of FIR and its splice variants drives NSCLC migration and dissemination.
FIR is alternatively spliced to lack the transcriptional repression domain within exon 2 (FIRDeltaexon2) in colorectal cancers.
This novel function of FIR splicing will contribute to clinical studies of cancer management through elucidating the mechanical interaction of FIR/FIRDeltaexon2/SAP155 as a potential target for cancer treatment.
To investigate a novel therapeutic strategy to target and suppress c-myc in human cancers using far up stream element (FUSE)-binding protein-interacting repressor (FIR).
SeV/dF/FIR was examined for its gene transduction efficiency, viral dose dependency of antitumor effect and apoptosis induction in HeLa (cervical squamous cell carcinoma) cells and SW480 (colon adenocarcinoma) cells.
Thus, FIR expressing vectors are potentially applicable for cancer therapy.
FIR is alternatively spliced by SAP155 in cancer cells lacking the transcriptional repression domain within exon 2 (FIRDeltaexon2), counteracting FIR for c-Myc protein expression.
Furthermore, in nude mouse tumor xenograft models, SeV/dF/FIR displayed high antitumor efficiency against human cancer cells.
SeV/dF/FIR showed strong tumor growth suppression with no significant side effects in an animal xenograft model, thus SeV/dF/FIR is potentially applicable for future clinical cancer treatment.
In this regard, the aim of this study was to evaluate and correlate both relative quantification of microRNA-7 using quantitative real time polymerase chain reaction and quantitative analysis of selenoprotein P using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay in sera of hepatocellular carcinoma patients, chronic liver disease patients, as well as normal healthy subjects in order to establish a new diagnostic biomarker with a valid non-invasive technique.
In addition, this study aimed to investigate whether changes in selenium supply affect microRNA-7 expression and selenoprotein P levels in human hepatocarcinoma cell line (HepG2).
The best cutoff for serum microRNA-7 and selenoprotein P to discriminate hepatocellular carcinoma group from benign and control groups was 0.06 and 4.30 mg/L, respectively.
Hence, serum microRNA-7 and selenoprotein P appear to be potential non-invasive diagnostic markers for hepatocellular carcinoma.
Moreover, the results suggest that selenium could be used as an anticancer therapy for hepatocellular carcinoma by affecting both microRNA-7 and selenoprotein P.
These experiments determined SEPP1 loss altered immune and epithelial cellular function in a murine model of colitis-associated carcinoma.
Through our genome-wide gene expression profile analyses of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) cells, we identified the overexpression of tubulin tyrosine ligase-like family member 4 (TTLL4) in PDAC cells.
To understand the molecular and genetic bases of neuroblastoma, we have generated its cDNA libraries and identified a human ortholog of tubulin tyrosine ligase gene (hTTL/Nbla0660) as a differentially expressed gene at high levels in a favorable subset of the tumor.
Serum antibodies to four common food antigens, three cows' milk proteins (casein, alpha-lactalbumin and beta-lactoglobulin) and ovalbumin, were investigated in 21 children with atopic dermatitis (aged 3 months to 3 years) and in 15 age-matched healthy controls.
Specific IgE was found in 76% of patients, while antigen-directed IgG and IgA were present both in patients and healthy controls; IgG to ovalbumin and IgA to alpha-lactalbumin were significantly higher in children with atopic dermatitis.
An ELISA was applied to measure IgG sub-class antibodies to cow's milk beta-lactoglobulin (BLG), alpha-lactalbumin (ALA) and alpha-casein (AC) and to hen's egg ovalbumin (OA) in the sera of nineteen adult patients with milk intolerance causing either asthma, eczema or both.
Occurrence and subclass distribution of IgG to alpha-lactalbumin (ALA), beta-lactoglobulin (BLG), and ovalbumin (OA) have been determined in 30 children with atopic dermatitis (AD) and in their mothers.
With high connectivity degrees in the pink module, TPX2, microtubule-associated (TPX2; degree, 25), minichromosome maintenance complex component 2 (MCM2; degree, 25), ubiquitin-like with PHD and ring finger domains 1 (UHRF1; degree, 22), cyclin-dependent kinase 2 (CDK2; degree, 20) and protein regulator of cytokinesis 1 (PRC1; degree, 20) may be involved in LSCC.
To report a case of bilateral papilloma virus-positive conjunctival intraepithelial neoplasm and the treatment results of using adjunctive interferon alpha-2b.
We reported that p62 (sequestosome 1) serves as a signaling hub in bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs) for the formation of signaling complexes, including NFKB, p38MAPK and JNK, that are involved in the increased osteoclastogenesis and multiple myeloma (MM) cell growth induced by BMSCs that are key contributors to multiple myeloma bone disease (MMBD), and demonstrated that the ZZ domain of p62 (p62-ZZ) is required for BMSC enhancement of MMBD.
In this study, we constructed a recombinant adenovirus 5-EVA1A vector (Ad5-EVA1A) to overexpress EVA1A in glioblastoma (GBM) cell lines and evaluated its anti-tumor activities in vitro and in vivo.
We found that overexpression of EVA1A in three GBM cell lines (U251, U87 and SHG44) resulted in a suppression of tumor cell growth via activation of autophagy and induction of cell apoptosis in a dose- and time-dependent manner.
Our data suggest that EVA1A-induced autophagy and apoptosis play a role in suppressing the development of GBM and their up-regulation may be an effective method for treating this form of cancer.
Although the tissue architecture was deformed, EVA1A was absent in the alpha cells of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas, intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms, mucinous cystadenomas, solid papillary tumors and pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors.
A decreased expression of FAM176A has been found in several types of human tumors in including lung cancers.
In the present study, we investigated the biological activities of FAM176A on the human non-small cell lung cancer cell line H1299 cells.
In addition, cell cycle analysis suggested that Ad5-FAM176A could induce cell cycle arrest at the G2/M phase, all of which suggested that adenovirus-mediated FAM176A gene transfer might present a new therapeutic approach for lung cancer treatment.
Our data indicated that Ad5-TMEM166 may be a novel gene therapy candidate for cancer.
In comparing human normal and tumor tissues, TMEM166 expression was widely downregulated in the cancer tissues.
The putative sarcoma, Sp24, showed clear evidence of epithelial differentiation but no evidence of vimentin expression.
However, the conjugate was not cytotoxic to p102 antigen negative rat fibrosarcoma SP-24 cells.
IM-ADRs mediated by T cells are associated with phenotypically distinct clinical diagnoses and can vary from a mild delayed rash to a life threatening cutaneous, systemic or organ disease, such as Stephen Johnson syndrome/toxic epidermal necrolysis (SJS/TEN), drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms (DRESS) and drug-induced liver disease (DILI).
The three distinct entities of importance are the former Lyell's syndrome, now identified as SJS-TEN syndrome (Stevens-Johnson syndrome/toxic epidermal necrolysis), the DRESS syndrome (drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms), and the AGEP syndrome (acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis).
Ils concernent trois entites distinctes qui sont l'ancien syndrome de Lyell, actuellement identifie comme SJS-NET (syndrome de Stevens-Johnson/necrolyse epidermique toxique), le syndrome DRESS (drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms) et le syndrome AGEP (acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis).
Potentially lifethreatening severe cutaneous adverse reactions (SCAR), namely drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms (DRESS: 14 cases) and Stevens-Johnson Syndrome/Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis (SJS/TEN: 6 cases) comprise almost 50% of cADRs.
Drug-induced severe cutaneous adverse reactions (SCARs) include acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis, drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms (DRESS), and epidermal necrolysis (Stevens-Johnson syndrome [SJS], toxic epidermal necrolysis).
In opposite to the main cutaneous allergic drug reactions such as urticaria or maculopapular skin rash, in which antibiotics are the main culprits, in severe drug allergic reactions such as SJS (Stevens-Johnson Syndrome), TEN (Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis), or DRESS (Drug Reaction with Eosinophilia and Systemic Symptoms) Syndrome, compounds like allopurinol and anticonvulsants are the main causes.
The second DHR includes exanthema, erythroderma, DRESS, Stevens-Johnson syndrome/toxic epidermal necrolysis (SJS/TEN), hepatitis, and agranulocytosis.
We enrolled 50 patients with OXC-cADRs, including 20 OXC-SJS/TEN and 6  drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms, of Chinese patients from Taiwan and Thai patients from Thailand.
Nonimmediate HSRs included linear IgA bullous dermatosis (LABD, n = 34), drug rash eosinophilia and systemic symptoms (DRESS) syndrome (n = 16), acute interstitial nephritis (AIN, n = 8), and Stevens-Johnson syndrome/toxic epidermal necrolysis (SJS/TEN, n = 6).
Severe cutaneous adverse reactions to drugs (SCARs) such as Stevens-Johnson syndrome/toxic epidermal necrolysis (SJS/TEN) and drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms/drug-induced hypersensitivity syndrome (DRESS/DIHS) serve as one of the main reasons for inpatient ophthalmic consultation.
Research over the last decade has established a central role for SPAK in the regulation of ion and water transport in the distal nephron, colonic crypts, and pancreatic ducts, and has implicated deregulated SPAK signaling in NaCl-sensitive hypertension, ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease, and cystic fibrosis.
Expert opinion: The development of novel drugs that antagonize the SPAK-WNK interaction, inhibit SPAK kinase activity, or disrupt SPAK kinase activation by interfering with its binding to MO25Alfa/Beta could be useful adjuncts in essential hypertension, inflammatory colitis, and cystic fibrosis.
In conclusion, SPAK deficiency increases intestinal innate immune homeostasis, which is important for control or attenuation of pathological responses in inflammatory bowel diseases.
In conclusion, overexpression of SPAK inhibits maintenance of intestinal mucosal innate immune homeostasis, which makes regulation of SPAK important to attenuate pathological responses in inflammatory bowel disease.
Here we report significantly increased SPAK expression levels in hyperosmotic environments, such as mucosal biopsy samples from patients with Crohn's disease, as well as colon tissues of C57BL/6 mice and Caco2-BBE cells treated with hyperosmotic medium.
We tested if changes on plasma levels of Brain Derived Neurotrophic Factor (BDNF), S100 calcium binding protein B (S100-B), Stem Cell Factor (SCF), Insulin-like Growth Factor-Binding Protein 2 (IGFBP-2), Epidermal Growth Factor (EGF), Platelet-Derived Growth Factor-BB (PDGF-BB), and Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor (VEGF) are associated with response to TSD + LT in 26 inpatients affected by a major depressive episode in the course of bipolar disorder.
A possible role of the factors 'physical activity' and 'posture' in the antidepressant effect of a total night's sleep deprivation (TSD) was investigated in 30 patients with major depressive disorder.
Cholangiocarcinoma is a disease entity comprising diverse epithelial tumours with features of cholangiocyte differentiation: cholangiocarcinomas are categorized according to anatomical location as intrahepatic (iCCA), perihilar (pCCA), or distal (dCCA).
Cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) represents a diverse group of epithelial cancers associated with the biliary tract, and can best be stratified anatomically into intrahepatic (iCCA), perihilar (pCCA) and distal (dCCA) subsets.
Preoperative evaluation of vasculobiliary anatomy in the umbilical fissure (U-point) is pivotal for perihilar cholangiocarcinoma (PCCA) applied to right-sided hepatectomy.
This study sought to define the role of adjuvant radiation therapy (RT) for patients with curative intent resection of perihilar cholangiocarcinoma (pCCA).
Our goal was to characterize PD-L1 expression in intra-hepatic (iCCA) and perihilar (pCCA) cholangiocarcinomas, and to correlate our results with clinicopathological features, density of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) and PD-1 expression.A series of 58 iCCAs and 41 pCCAs was included in the study.
Promising candidates for targeted, personalized therapy have emerged, including potential driver fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR) gene fusions and somatic mutations in isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH)1/2 in iCCA, protein kinase cAMP-activated catalytic subunit alpha (PRKACA) or beta (PRKACB) gene fusions in pCCA, and ELF3 mutations in dCCA/ampullary carcinoma.
Liver transplantation (LT) provides a good chance of cure for selected patients with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and perihilar cholangiocarcinoma (pCCA).
Here, we investigated BANCR's role in papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) by assessing BANCR levels in PTC and matched normal thyroid epithelial tissues from 92 patients using qRT-PCR.
Of the three lncRNAs (BANCR, PTCSC3, and NAMA), expression of BANCR was significantly up-regulated while PTCSC3 and NAMA were significantly down-regulated in papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) compared to that in normal tissue.
However, little is known about the role of BANCR in the development of papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC).
A Japanese randomized controlled study showed that Interferon a (IFN-a1b) therapy is clinically effective in decreasing the frequency of attacks in multiple sclerosis (MS), even in optico-spinal MS (OSMS).
Cytokines have a central role in multiple sclerosis (MS) pathogenesis and may contribute to the aetiology of MS. A polymorphism in the IFNA17 gene with an allele carrying a pre-mature stop codon has been suggested to convey a 26-fold increased risk for MS. We investigated the possible association between this polymorphism and MS using population-based samples from a genetically well-characterized population.
Interferon beta-1a (IFNa-1a) has demonstrated efficacy in multiple sclerosis (MS), although its mechanism of action remains only partly understood.
We evaluated the ex vivo and in vitro effects of IFNa-1a (Rebif) on regulatory T-cell (T(Reg)) function in 22 relapsing-remitting MS patients and 16 healthy controls.
These patients were 40.6% of 14,553 enrolled in the parent study who had either chest radiography or chest CT. Occult injuries were pneumothorax, hemothorax, sternal or greater than 2 rib fractures, pulmonary contusion, thoracic spine or scapula fracture, and diaphragm or great vessel injury found on chest CT but not on preceding chest radiography.
Patients with occult injury included 514 with pulmonary contusions (of 682 total, 75.4% occult), 405 with pneumothorax (of 597 total, 67.8% occult), 184 with hemothorax (of 230 total, 80.0% occult), those with greater than 2 rib fractures (n=672/1,120, 60.0% occult) or sternal fracture (n=269/281, 95.7% occult), 12 with great vessel injury (of 18 total, 66.7% occult), 5 with diaphragm injury (of 6, 83.3% occult), and 537 with multiple occult injuries.
Paraffin-embedded lung tissues obtained from 20 autopsied cadavers with complicated pneumonia and 10 control cadavers without pneumonia were used for immunohistochemical analyses using primary antibodies against podoplanin, vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-3 (VEGFR-3), CD34, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-C, VEGF-D, CD73, and CD163.
No significant difference was noticed in the sCD163 in patients with chronic hepatitis B, community acquired pneumonia, chronic glomerulonephritis, and acute pancreatitis (P &gt; 0.05).
The follow-up after treatment for three HLH patients showed that serum levels of soluble CD163 were significantly reduced, but the soluble CD163 levels rebounded in one patient who was complicated by fungal pneumonia infection.
#目#的#： #研#究#阻#塞#性#睡#眠#呼#吸#暂#停#低#通#气#综#合#征(obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea syndrome, OSAHS)#合#并#难#治#性#高#血#压(resistant hypertension, RH)#患#者#中, OSAHS#的#治#疗#对#血#压#控#制#的#意#义#。 #方#法#： 80#例OSAHS#合#并RH#患#者[#至#少3#种#抗#高#血#压#药(#包#括#利#尿#剂)#治#疗, #仍#不#能#将#收#缩#压#和#舒#张#压#控#制#在#目#标#水#平(140/90 mmHg, 1 mmHg=0.133 kPa)]#行#手#术#或#持#续#正#压#通#气#治#疗, #治#疗#前#及#治#疗6#个#月#后#行#多#道#睡#眠#监#测#和#动#态#血#压#监#测, #记#录#呼#吸#暂#停#低#通#气#指#数(apnea hypopnea index, AHI)#、#最#低#血#氧#饱#和#度(SaO(2))#、#血#压#、#夜#间#血#压#下#降#率, #比#较#治#疗#前#后#降#压#药#物#种#类#的#变#化#。 #结#果#： #治#疗#后, AHI#由(32.9+/-10.8)#次/h(x+/-s, #下#同)#降#至(9.4+/-6.5)#次/h, #最#低SaO(2)#由(0.682+/-0.062)#增#至(0.884+/-0.056), #差#异#均#有#统#计#学#意#义(t#值#分#别#为18.863#、26.614, P#值#均&lt;0.001)#。#全#天#收#缩#压#由(150.5+/-9.8) mmHg#降#至(140.7+/-6.8) mmHg, #舒#张#压#由(97.8+/-7.3) mmHg#降#至(88.6+/-6.3) mmHg#；#日#间#收#缩#压#由(154.3+/-8.9) mmHg#降#至(144.8+/-5.8) mmHg, #舒#张#压#由(100.6+/-7.4) mmHg#降#至(91.3+/-5.5) mmHg#；#夜#间#收#缩#压#由(145.5+/-8.8) mmHg#降#至(135.8+/-5.7) mmHg, #舒#张#压#由(93.8+/-6.4) mmHg#降#至(84.6+/-5.9) mmHg, #差#异#均#有#统#计#学#意#义(t#值#分#别#为7.832#、6.903#、7.005#、6.848#、8.025#、7.554, P#值#均&lt;0.001)#。#夜#间#收#缩#压#下#降#值#为(11.5+/-2.2)mmHg#、#舒#张#压#下#降#值#为(10.2+/-3.1)mmHg, #日#间#收#缩#压#下#降#值#为(9.0+/-2.8)mmHg#、#舒#张#压#下#降#值#为(7.9+/-3.5)mmHg, #夜#间#收#缩#压#及#舒#张#压#下#降#较#日#间#更#明#显, #差#异#均#有#统#计#学#意#义(t#值#分#别#为9.732#、6.936, P#值#均&lt;0.001)#。#夜#间#血#压#下#降#率&lt;10%#的#患#者#比#例#由#治#疗#前#的75.0%#降#为#治#疗#后#的37.5%, #差#异#有#统#计#学#意#义(X(2)=22.857, P&lt;0.01), #提#示#血#压#昼#夜#节#律#变#化#情#况#好#转#。45#例#患#者#服#用#的#降#压#药#物#种#类#减#少, #由#治#疗#前#的(3.2+/-0.4)#种#减#为#治#疗#后#的(2.6+/-0.5)#种, #差#异#有#统#计#学#意#义(t=9.276, P&lt;0.01)#。 #结#论#： OSAHS#合#并RH#患#者#中, #治#疗OSAHS#能#有#效#改#善#血#压#控#制#水#平, #改#善#血#压#昼#夜#节#律, #减#少#降#压#药#物#的#使#用#。.
This study intended to investigate the role of microRNA-27b (miR-27b) in proliferation of oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) cells and to explore the potential molecular mechanism.
The miR-27b expression in OSCC cell lines was significantly decreased compared with control.
Overexpression of miR-27b remarkably inhibited OSCC cell proliferation.
Additionally, miR-27b could target and inhibit FZD7 expression and decrease the activity of Wnt signaling pathway.miR-27b could inhibit OSCC cell proliferation through inhibiting FZD7 and FZD7-mediated Wnt signaling pathway.
The aim of this study was to investigate the functional significance of miR-23b and miR-27b in OSCC and to identify novel miR-23b/27b-mediated cancer pathways and target genes involved in OSCC oncogenesis and metastasis.
Expression levels of miR-23b and miR-27b were significantly reduced in OSCC specimens.
Dysregulation of miR-27b has been detected in numerous types of human cancer, including hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC); however, the detailed role of miR-27b in HCC has yet to be elucidated.
Re-expression of miR-27b in human colon cancer HCT116 cells caused morphological changes and suppressed tumor growth, cell adhesion, and invasion.
The purposes of the current study were to investigate the effects of a monoclonal antibody (mAb) on cytosolic phospholipase A2 alpha (cPLA2Alfa) in mice with cerebral ischemia-reperfusion (IR) injury and to ascertain the potential mechanisms of those effects.
This study evaluated whether the use of anti-cPLA2Alfa mAb could reduce stroke injury in a mouse model of cerebral IR injury.
At the end of treatment, the levels of serum inflammatory factors of leukotriene B4 (LTB4), prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), tumor necrosis factor-Alfa (TNF-Alfa), and interleukin-6 (IL-6) were measured by enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA); the changes of the indexes of hemodynamic [left ventricular systolic pressure (LVSP), left ventricular end-diastolic pressure (LVEDP), the maximal rate of increase/decrease in left ventricular pressure (+/-dp/dt max)], the ratio of the heart weight/body weight, and the ratio of the left ventricular weight/heart weight (LVW/HW), the myocardial infarction area, myocardial histopathological changes were observed in the three groups; myocardial tissues inflammatory related factors [the mRNA and protein expressions of cytosolic phospholipase A2 (cPLA2), cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), 5-lipoxygenase (5-LOX)], and the expression levels of transforming growth factor-Beta (TGF-Beta)/Smads signal transduction pathway related protein (TGF-Beta1, Smad2/3, Collagen I, Collagen III) and cell apoptosis related factors (Bcl-2, Bax) protein were measured.
SNHG14 increased the expression of PLA2G4A by inhibition of miR-145-5p, which resulted in the activation of MCs in cerebral infarction.
We covered an introduction to sphingomyelinases and its enzymatic product ceramide, in membrane domains or lipid rafts and the nucleus; followed by crosstalk between sphingomyelinase and cytosolic phospholipase A2 (cPLA2) catalysed products including arachidonic acid, functions of acid sphingomyelinase (aSMase) and neutral sphingomyelinase (N-SMase) in neurons, neuronal progenitor cells, glial cells, and brain endothelial cells; alterations in acid and N-SMases in Niemann Pick Disease Type A, major depression, Alzheimer's disease, cerebral ischemia, and pain; and recent developments in identification of inhibitors to sphingomyelinases.
To compare the expression of c-myc and c-fms proto-oncogenes in the placenta and hydatidiform mole.
The results of northern blot hybridisation analysis showed that c-fms was expressed more strongly in hydatidiform moles compared with normal placenta of similar gestational age.
The difference in c-fms expression between hydatidiform moles and normal placentas suggests that c-fms may have a role in the development of molar pregnancies.
Here, employing multiple experimental models of CKD, we studied the effects of inhibition of the EP4 receptor, one of four receptor subtypes for the prostanoid prostaglandin E2.
Indicating a glucose-independent mechanism of action, EP4 inhibition also attenuated proteinuria development and glomerular scarring in non-diabetic rats subjected to surgical renal mass ablation.
In rodent models of diabetic and non-diabetic CKD, EP4 inhibition attenuated renal injury through mechanisms that were distinct from either broadspectrum COX inhibition or "standard of care" renin angiotensin system blockade.
EP4 inhibition may represent a viable repurposing opportunity for the treatment of CKD.
In the endometriotic lesions, prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) produced by cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), binds to its EP4 receptor (EP4), and via c-Src kinase induces MMPs activation, promoting endometriosis.
The objective of the present study was to determine the effects of pharmacological inhibition of PGE2 receptors, EP2 and EP4, on molecular and cellular aspects of the pathogenesis of endometriosis and associated clinical symptoms.
Using human fluorescent endometriotic cell lines and chimeric mouse model as preclinical testing platform, our results, to our knowledge for the first time, indicate that selective inhibition of EP2/EP4: (i) decreases growth and survival of endometriosis lesions; (ii) decreases angiogenesis and innervation of endometriosis lesions; (iii) suppresses proinflammatory state of dorsal root ganglia neurons to decrease pelvic pain; (iv) decreases proinflammatory, estrogen-dominant, and progesterone-resistant molecular environment of the endometrium and endometriosis lesions; and (v) restores endometrial functional receptivity through multiple mechanisms.
However, the effects of the secreted growth factors CCN2, TGF-Beta, and BMP4 on stromal tissues in ameloblastoma remain unclear.
Expression analysis revealed several genes that were differentially expressed between benign and malignant nodules (transforming growth factor, cadherin 1, collagen Alfa1, catenin Alfa1, integrin Alfa3, and fibronectin 1 [FN1]), between follicular adenomas and follicular variant of papillary thyroid carcinoma (FN1, laminin Gamma1, integrin Beta2, connective tissue growth factor, catenin Delta1, and integrin AlfaV), and between BRAF-wild-type and BRAF-mutated papillary thyroid carcinomas (TIMP metallopeptidase inhibitor 1; catenin Alfa1; secreted phosphoprotein 1; FN1; ADAM metallopeptidase with thrombospondin type 1 motif, 1; and selectin L).
The gain of function of miR-93/106b in leiomyoma smooth muscle cells, myometrial smooth muscle cells, and the leiomyosarcoma cell line dose dependently repressed F3 and IL8 through direct interactions with their respective 3'-untranslated region and indirectly through F3 repression inhibited IL8, CTGF, and PAI-1 expression, confirmed by using small interfering RNA silencing or factor Vlla (FVIIa) activation of F3, as well as reducing the rate of proliferation, while increasing caspase-3/7 activity.
We concluded that differential expression of miR-93/106b and their direct and/or indirect regulatory functions on F3, IL8, CTGF, and PAI-1 expression, with key roles in inflammation and tissue turnover may be of significance in the outcome of leiomyoma growth and associated symptoms.
Immortalized leiomyoma and myometrial cells demonstrate increased mRNA and protein production of the ECM proteins, collagen 1A1 (15.0-fold), fibronectin 1 (2.93 fold), and connective tissue growth factor (9.40-fold) with exogenous TGF-beta3 stimulation.
Notably, the expression of collagen 1A1, fibronectin 1, and connective tissue growth factor in myometrial cells increase to similar expression levels as those found in leiomyoma cells.
Gene-based association analyses using SKAT-O shows nominal significant association with multifocal FMD (N = 164) for myosin light chain kinase (MYLK, P = 0.01) previously involved in thoracic aortic aneurysm, obscurin (OBSCN), a sarcomeric protein (P = 0.003), dynein cytoplasmic heavy chain 1 (DYNC2H1, P = 0.02) and RNF213 previously associated with Moyamoya disease (P = 0.01).
SKH-1 hairless mice immunosuppressed with cyclophosphamide and hairless SCID mice (SHO strain) were infected cutaneously with vaccinia virus.
To explore the risk factors associated with acute/subacute cerebral infarction (ASCI) in HIV-negative patients with cryptococcal meningitis (CM).
Acute/subacute cerebral infarction (ASCI) in HIV-negative cryptococcal meningoencephalitis (CM) adults has rarely been examined by a series of MRI-based follow-up study.
In polycythemia vera (PV), leukocytosis, abnormal karyotype, phlebotomy requirement on hydroxyurea, increased bone marrow fibrosis, and mutations in ASXL1, SRSF2, and IDH2 were identified as additional adverse prognostic factors.
For essential thrombocythemia, reported risk factors for leukemic transformation include advanced age, extreme thrombocytosis, anemia, leukocytosis, and sequence variants/mutations involving TP53 and EZH2 (for expansion of gene symbols, see www.genenames.org); for polycythemia vera, advanced age, leukocytosis, abnormal karyotype, mutations involving SRSF2 and IDH2, and treatment with pipobroman, chlorambucil, or P32; and for PMF, increased blast percentage, thrombocytopenia, abnormal karyotype, triple-negative driver mutational status, and sequence variants/mutations involving SRSF2, RUNX1, CEBPA, and SH2B3.
It is caused by steroid sulfatase deficiency and is often associated with further clinical problems, such as cryptorchidism (~20%) or social communication deficits, such as attention deficit hyperactivity syndrome (40%) or autism (25%).
In fact, abnormal activation of GFI1B and GFI1 has been related to human medulloblastoma and is also likely to be relevant in blood malignancies.
In addition to the BRCA2 6174delT, the medulloblastoma cells had amplification of MYC, deletion at Xp11.2, and isochromosome 17, but no structural variations or overexpression of GFI1 or GFI1B.
In a recent publication in Nature, Northcott and colleagues identify a novel region of structural variation in medulloblastoma that leads to oncogenic activation of GFI1B and GFI1 by repositioning these genes next to super-enhancers.
Our results, supported by evidence from mouse models, identify GFI1 and GFI1B as prominent medulloblastoma oncogenes and implicate 'enhancer hijacking' as an efficient mechanism driving oncogene activation in a childhood cancer.
The fact that this woman could respond consistently to hMG 20 years after the diagnosis of premature menopause, it is clear that initially the etiology of the extremely high LH and FSH levels in an estrogen-deficient 18-year-old was the presence of gonadotropinoma secreting inert LH and FSH.
Immunoglobulin (CD79a) binding protein 1 (IGBP1) is universally overexpressed in lung adenocarcinoma and exerts an anti-apoptotic effect by binding to PP2Ac.
The Tfh cells from NSCLC patients were also less effective at downregulating IgD and upregulating CD27 expression in naive B cells, and induced less IgM, IgG and IgA secretion, than those from healthy controls.
There were no findings in the bronchoscopy, but the lung biopsy showed a B-cell pulmonary lymphoma (positive to CD20 and CD79a in immunostaining).
To evaluate the possible synergistic effect of at risk genotypes of ARMS2/LOC387715 (A69S), DNA repair SMUG1 rs3087404, CCL2-2518, C3 (R102G), CFH Y402H, complement factor B (L9H), and complement factor I (CFI) (G119R) in advanced age-related macular degeneration compared to those of healthy controls.
The aim of this study was to determine the potential association between 10 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) located in 4 different genetic regions (CFI, COL8A1, LIPC, and APOE), and choroidal neovascularization in age-related macular degeneration and the development of choroidal neovascularization in highly myopic eyes of a Caucasian population.
Furthermore we conducted a meta-analysis of COL8A1, CFI and LIPC genes SNPs (rs669676, rs10033900 and rs10468017) and found that only rs669676 of these SNPs were associated with high myopia neovascularization.
To systematically review the association between complement factors I (CFI) polymorphisms and age-related macular degeneration (AMD) and to explore whether CFI polymorphisms are associated with AMD.
Cytogenetic anomalies involving the 3q26 chromosomal region are rare in acute myeloid leukemia (AML).
The t(3;21)(q26.2;q22) translocation is a rare chromosomal abnormality exhibited almost exclusively in therapy-related myelodysplastic syndrome/acute myeloid leukemia (t-MDS/AML) or in the blastic crisis phase of chronic myelogenous leukemia, which results in the fusion of the runt related transcription factor 1 (RUNX1, also called AML1) gene at 21q22 to the myelodysplasia syndrome 1 (MDS1)-ecotropic virus integration site 1 (EVI1) complex locus (MECOM) at 3q26.2, generating various fusion transcripts, including AML1/MDS1/EVI1 (AME).
Chromosomal rearrangements between 3q21 and 3q26 induce inappropriate EVI1 expression by recruiting a GATA2-distal hematopoietic enhancer (G2DHE) to the proximity of the EVI1 gene, leading to myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and acute myeloid leukemia (AML).
Transcriptional activation of the EVI1 oncogene (3q26) leads to aggressive forms of human acute myeloid leukemia (AML).
The significance of 3q26.2/EVI1 rearrangement has been well recognized in acute myeloid leukemia, myelodysplastic syndrome, and chronic myeloid leukemia.
The transcription factor, zinc-finger protein 545 (ZNF545), that belongs to the Kruppel-associated box zinc-finger protein (KRAB-ZFP) family, acts as a tumor suppressor and is inactivated by promoter methylation in cancers such as nasopharyngeal carcinoma, breast cancer, and gastric cancer, but its role in colorectal cancer (CRC) is unknown.
ZBRK1, a zinc finger protein that interacts with breast cancer 1 (BRCA1) and KRAB-ZFP-associated protein 1 (KAP1), has been suggested to serve as a tumor suppressor via repression of tumor metastasis/invasion.
Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH) clones deficient in glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored molecules, including CD55 and CD59, have been previously described in patients with multiple myeloma (MM).
We demonstrate that expression of the complement regulator CD59 is associated with resistance to rituximab-mediated complement lysis of multiple myeloma (MM) and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) cell lines.
We demonstrate that expression of the complement regulator CD59 is associated with resistance to rituximab-mediated complement lysis of multiple myeloma (MM) and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) cell lines.
Thirty-nine retinoblastoma cases were histopathologically diagnosed and analyzed by immunohistochemistry using monoclonal antibodies against the immature neural cell marker SRY-box containing gene 2 (SOX-2), the mature neuronal cell marker microtubule-associated protein 2 (MAP2), and the mature glial cell marker glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP).
Expression of SOX-2 was strong in 97.4% of retinoblastoma cases, while MAP-2 was expressed in 59% of cases.
Retinoblastoma cell lines showed strong positivity for SOX2 (90% of WERI-1 cells and 70% of Y79 cells) and MAP2 (90% of cells in both lines).
In the present study, the 4 Yamanaka transcription factors, Oct4, Sox2, Klf4 and c-myc, were transduced into retinoblastoma cells (Rbc51).
Furthermore, we showed that CA promoted proteasomal degradation of several substrate proteins, including Cyclin B1, retinoblastoma (RB), SOX2, and glial fibrillary acid protein (GFAP), whereas MYC levels were not modified.
Then, the expression of some cell-cycle-regulating genes including cyclin A2 (cyclin A2), Cyclin-dependent kinases 2 (CDK2), cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors (P16, P18 and P27), Retinoblastoma (RB) and transcription factors (SMAD 4, SOX2 and SOX17) was investigated using quantitative RT-PCR.
This study investigates the association between angiogenic factors in retinoblastomas with choroidal and/or optic nerve invasion (high-risk/invasive retinoblastoma) and expression of Sox2, a stem cell marker.
To investigate the association between the expression of angiogenic factors and markers of tumor invasiveness, such as the stem cell marker Sox2, in retinoblastoma tissues.
Increased expression of angiogenic factors, with a concomitant increase in expression of the stem cell marker Sox2 observed in retinoblastoma tissues, may partially explain the aggressiveness of these tumors.
The present study aimed to investigate the association between the expression of sex-determining region Y box 2 (SOX2) in retinoblastoma (Rb) tissues and peripheral blood, and the clinicopathological characteristics of Rb.
We identified BACH2 (rs62408233-A, OR = 2.01 (1.71-2.37), P = 1.66 x 10-15 , MAF 0.46/0.29 in cases/controls) as a novel gene associated with Addison's disease development.
Whilst BACH2 has been previously reported to associate with organ-specific autoimmune diseases co-inherited with Addison's disease, we have identified BACH2 as a major risk locus in Addison's disease, independent of concomitant autoimmune diseases.
We aimed to evaluate the accuracy of fecal matrix metalloprotease-9 (MMP-9) and fecal lipocalin-2 (LCN-2) compared with calprotectin in detecting endoscopic activity in IBD STUDY:: Overall, 86 IBD adults underwent colonoscopy consecutively and prospectively, with Crohn's disease Endoscopic Index of Severity (CDEIS) in Crohn's disease (CD) patients or Mayo endoscopic subscore calculation for ulcerative colitis (UC) patients, and stool collection.
Studies in the murine model of colitis have demonstrated that Lcn2 deficiency exacerbates colitogenesis; however, the therapeutic potential of Lcn2 supplementation has yet to be elucidated.
In light of its potential mucoprotective functions, we, herein, investigated whether expression of Lcn2 in the probiotic bacterium can be exploited to alleviate experimental colitis.
Dextran sodium sulfate colitis model was used to investigate the colonization ability and therapeutic potential of Lactis-Lcn2 and Lactis-Con.
Consistent with these features, Lactis-Lcn2 displayed better mucoprotection against intestinal inflammation than Lactis-Con when administered into mice with dextran sulfate sodium-induced acute colitis.
Our findings suggest that Lcn2 expression can be exploited to enhance the survivability of probiotic bacteria during inflammation, which could further improve its efficacy to treat experimental colitis.
The data herein is related to the research article entitled "Microbiota-inducible Innate Immune, Siderophore Binding Protein Lipocalin 2 is Critical for Intestinal Homeostasis" (Singh et al., 2016) [1] where we have demonstrated that C57BL/6 Lipocalin 2 deficient mice (Lcn2KO) developed chronic colitis upon anti-interleukin-10 receptor (AlfaIL-10R) monoclonal antibody administration.
In the present article, we evaluated the susceptibility of BALB/c Lcn2KO mice and their WT littermates to the AlfaIL-10R neutralization-induced chronic colitis.
Our data showed that AlfaIL-10R mAb-treated BALB/c Lcn2KO mice exhibited severe chronic colitis (i.e., splenomegaly, colomegaly, colonic pathology, and incidence of rectal prolapse) when compared to WT mice.
Although Lcn2/NGAL expression is increased in the inflamed intestinal tissues of patients with inflammatory bowel disease, the role of Lcn2/NGAL in the development of intestinal inflammation remains unclear.
Here we investigated the role of Lcn2/NGAL in intestinal inflammation using a spontaneous mouse colitis model, interleukin-10 knock out (IL-10 KO) mice.
Lcn2 expression in the colonic tissues of IL-10 KO mice increased with the development of colitis.
Lcn2/IL-10 double-KO mice showed a more rapid onset and development of colitis compared to IL-10 KO mice.
Transfer of Lcn2-repleted macrophages prevented the development of colitis in Lcn2/IL-10 double-KO mice in vivo.
Mutations in NR5A1 have been reported as a frequent cause of 46,XY disorders of sex development (DSD) associated to a broad phenotypic spectrum ranging from infertility, ambiguous genitalia, anorchia to gonadal dygenesis and female genitalia.
In 46,XX individuals, NR5A1 mutations are a rare genetic cause of POI, manifesting as primary or secondary amenorrhea, infertility, hypoestrogenism, and elevated gonadotropin levels.
In 46, XY individuals with mutation of SF-1 gene, adrenal failure, testis dysgenesis, androgen synthesis defects, hypospadias and anorchia with microphallus, infertility can occur from severe to mild.
Variants in SF-1/NR5A1 more commonly cause a spectrum of reproductive phenotypes ranging from 46,XY DSD (partial testicular dysgenesis or reduced androgen production) and hypospadias to male factor infertility or primary ovarian insufficiency.
To study the role of NR5A1 in cryptorchidism and male factor infertility.
Mutations in NR5A1 have been initially associated with primary adrenal insufficiency and 46,XY gonadal dysgenesis and more recently with less severe phenotypes, including preliminary descriptions in severe forms of male factor infertility.
Newborns with cryptorchidism carry NR5A1 mutations at low frequency (0.7%), whereas no mutations were found in milder forms of infertility and normozoospermia, irrespective of the presence of cryptorchidism.
This study, combined with what is already known about NR5A1-associated phenotypes, suggests considering mutations in this gene as a novel genetic cause of more severe forms of male factor infertility, especially when associated with a history of cryptorchidism.
In the present study, we observed that the high expression of TXNDC17 (thioredoxin domain containing 17) was associated with Taxol resistance in colorectal cancer cells.
Taxol exposure induced high levels of phospho-STAT3 (Tyr 705) and TXNDC17; and increase of basal autophagy in colorectal cancer cells.
These results suggest the possibility that TXNDC17 could play an important role in Taxol resistance via enhancing autophagy in human colorectal cancer cells.
TXNDC17 may become a potential target of colorectal cancer therapeutics.
Sickle-(DeltaBeta)0-thalassemia is a rare variant of sickle cell disease (delta-beta thalassemia occurring in association with sickle hemoglobin, HbS), sparsely reported in literature, and has been associated with symptomatology necessitating careful monitoring and follow-up.
Although much progress has been made in our understanding of the natural history, pathogenesis and clinical manifestations of Beta- and DeltaBeta-thalassemia, bone manifestations remain a puzzle for the clinician.
Background: Xmn-1 polymorphism of #𝜸Gglobin gene (HBG2) is a prominent quantitative trait loci (QTL) in Beta-thalassemia intermediate (Beta-TI).
A Ly1 antibody reactive (LYAR)-binding motif disruptive rSNP rs368698783 (G/A) from LD block 5 in the proximal promoter of hemoglobin subunit gamma 1 (HBG1) was found to be a significant predictor for Beta-thalassemia clinical severity by epigenetic-mediated variant-dependent HbF elevation.
Hereditary persistence of fetal hemoglobin deletion type-2 (HPFH-2) and Sicilian-DeltaBeta-thalassemia are conditions described as large deletions of the human Beta-like globin cluster, with absent Beta-globin chains and a compensatory variable increase in Gamma-globin.
Forty-nine differentially expressed miRNAs were identified by microarrays in CD34+-derived erythroid cells of two subjects heterozygous for Sicilian-DeltaBeta-thalassemia, 2 for HPFH-2 and 3 for controls after 13 days of culture.
These data suggest an important action for miRNA that may partially explain the phenotypic differences between HPFH-2 and Sicilian DeltaBeta-thalassemia and the increased expression of Gamma-globin in these conditions.
We assessed the effectiveness of this method for detecting Beta-thalassemia (Beta-thal), DeltaBeta-thalassemia (DeltaBeta-thal) and most common Hb variants.
Disorders resulting from mutations in the hemoglobin subunit beta gene (HBB; which encodes Beta-globin), mainly sickle cell disease (SCD) and Beta-thalassemia, become symptomatic postnatally as fetal Gamma-globin expression from two paralogous genes, hemoglobin subunit gamma 1 (HBG1) and HBG2, decreases and adult Beta-globin expression increases, thereby shifting red blood cell (RBC) hemoglobin from the fetal (referred to as HbF or Alfa2Gamma2) to adult (referred to as HbA or Alfa2Beta2) form.
Hepatocellular carcinoma development is complex because of the metabolism disequilibrium involving SULT1A3/4, a predominant sulfotransferase that metabolizes sulfonic xenobiotics and endogenous catecholamines.
However, the correlation between SULT1A3/4 and hepatocellular carcinoma progression is unclear.
By utilizing immunofluorescence and immunohistochemical analysis, we found that in nine hepatocellular carcinoma clinical specimens, SULT1A3/4 was abundantly expressed in tumor tissues compared to that in the adjacent tissues.
Moreover, liver cancer cells (HepG2, MHCC97-L, and MHCC97-H) had higher basal expression of SULT1A3/4 than immortalized liver cells (L02 and Chang liver).
Interestingly, dopamine significantly induced SULT1A3/4 expression in liver cancer HepG2 cells, while decreased that in L02 cells.
Our results implied that SULT1A3/4 exhibited bidirectional effect on tumor and normal hepatocytes and may thus provide a novel strategy for hepatocellular carcinoma clinical targeting.
In addition, SULT1A3/4 re-expression could serve as a biomarker for hepatocellular carcinoma prognosis.
The aim of our study was to compare microvascular changes examined by nailfold videocapillaroscopy (NVC) examination with serum concentrations of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), soluble thrombomodulin (sTM) and endothelin-1 (ET-1) in people with Type 1 diabetes with and without microangiopathy.
Higher serum concentration of VEGF (p&lt;0.001), ET-1 (p&lt;0.001) and sTM (p&lt;0.05) were demonstrated in people with diabetes complicated with microangiopathy compared to healthy controls.
Moreover, comparison between people with and without microangiopathic complications showed a significantly higher capillaroscopic score and sTM serum concentration in the group with retinopathy (p&lt;0.001) nephropathy (p&lt;0.001) and neuropathy (p&lt;0.01).
In the present study, copy number variation of the SULT1A3/4 genes in healthy individuals, as well as a cohort of Parkinson's disease and Alzheimer's disease patients was examined.
This study reports the involvement of stathmin in the mTOR/HIF-1 Alfa /VEGF pathway in ovarian clear cell adenocarcinoma (CCA) during hypoxia.
We examined 94 surgically resected ovarian clear cell adenocarcinoma specimens from patients treated with taxane-containing regimens (n=44) and with taxane-free regimens (n=50), using immunohistochemistry to detect expression of beta-tubulin III, stathmin, and MAP4.
MIMA-8 is the first example of a Mab anti-Jsb and was used in the clinical laboratory for screening donor RBCs for Js(b-) blood and for typing RBCs from patients even when the RBCs were coated with anti-IgG as is the case in autoimmune haemolytic anaemia.
We localized this gene (C2orf8 encoding 288L6 SAM-methyltransferase) to chromosome 2p22--&gt;p21 by FISH, and sublocalized it to BAC RP11 288L6 flanked by D2S2238 and D2S2331.
Regulatory factor X4 variant transcript 3 (Rfx4_v3) gene disruption in mice demonstrated that interruption of a single allele (heterozygous, +/-) prevented formation of the subcommissural organ, resulting in congenital hydrocephalus, while interruption of two alleles (homozygous, -/-) caused fatal failure of dorsal midline brain structure formation.
Immunization of rabbits with GM1-containing ganglioside mixtures, purified GM1, or Campylobacter jejuni lipo-oligosaccharide exhibiting a GM1-like structure elicits GM1-specific antibodies, but axonal polyneuropathy only occurs in a subset of animals.
Molecular mimicry of Campylobacter jejuni lipo-oligosaccharides (LOS) with gangliosides in nervous tissue is considered to induce cross-reactive antibodies that lead to Guillain-Barre syndrome (GBS), an acute polyneuropathy.
The objective of this study is to investigate the levels of interleukin (IL)-21 and autoantibodies (AAbs) against IL-21 and their association with clinical characteristics and laboratory parameters in patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
Interleukin-21 (IL-21) is a cytokine which plays a significant role in the pathogenesis and disease activity of rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
Interleukin-21 (IL-21) is a T-cell-derived cytokine whose receptor is expressed on a variety of cells and therefore might have pleiotropic roles in the pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
In this study, we investigated the involvement of IL-21 signaling in the development of collagen-induced arthritis (CIA), an animal model of RA, using IL-21 receptor knockout (Il21r KO) mice.
We explored the differential reactions of melanocortin 1-5 receptors (MC1-5R) gene expressions in pathogenetic leucocyte subsets in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) to treatment with TNF-Alfa inhibitor adalimumab.
Metabolic cutis laxa results from Menkes syndrome, caused by a defect in the ATPase copper transporting alpha (ATP7A) gene; congenital disorders of glycosylation due to mutations in subunit 7 of the component of oligomeric Golgi (COG7)-congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG) complex; combined disorder of N- and O-linked glycosylation, due to mutations in ATPase H+ transporting V0 subunit a2 (ATP6VOA2) gene; pyrroline-5-carboxylate reductase 1 deficiency; pyrroline-5-carboxylate synthase deficiency; macrocephaly, alopecia, cutis laxa, and scoliosis (MACS) syndrome, due to Ras and Rab interactor 2 (RIN2) mutations; transaldolase deficiency caused by mutations in the transaldolase 1 (TALDO1) gene; Gerodermia osteodysplastica due to mutations in the golgin, RAB6-interacting (GORAB or SCYL1BP1) gene; and mitogen-activated pathway (MAP) kinase defects, caused by mutations in several genes [protein tyrosine phosphatase, non-receptor-type 11 (PTPN11), RAF, NF, HRas proto-oncogene, GTPase (HRAS), B-Raf proto-oncogene, serine/threonine kinase (BRAF), MEK1/2, KRAS proto-oncogene, GTPase (KRAS), SOS Ras/Rho guanine nucleotide exchange factor 2 (SOS2), leucine rich repeat scaffold protein (SHOC2), NRAS proto-oncogene, GTPase (NRAS), and Raf-1 proto-oncogene, serine/threonine kinase (RAF1)], which regulate the Ras-MAPK cascade.
This study aimed to assess the tolerability of the extended use (&lt;=35 days) of MNK-155, a biphasic (immediate-release/extended-release) hydrocodone bitartrate/N-acetyl-p-aminophenol (acetaminophen) (IR/ER HB/APAP) 7.5/325-mg fixed-dose combination analgesic agent, in patients with chronic noncancer pain (CNCP) caused by osteoarthritis or chronic low back pain.
We found that CHD7 expression was positively correlated with a small subset of classical oncogenes, notably NRAS, in breast cancer.
Knockdown of CHD7 inhibits cell proliferation and decreases gene expression of several CHD7 targets, including NRAS, in breast cancer cell lines.
Overexpression of CSTF3 was common in triple-negative breast cancer cell lines, and elevated CSTF3 levels were sufficient to induce APA of NRAS and c-JUN.
The definite function of PEBP4 in regulating the EMT of prostate cancer, however, is still unclear.
Here, we examined the functional role of PEBP4 and the underlying molecular mechanisms in hypoxia-induced EMT in prostate cancer cells.
Our results showed that PEBP4 mRNA and protein expression was markedly increased in the human prostate cancer tissues and cell lines.
Furthermore, knockdown of PEBP4 prevented hypoxia-induced the expression of p-Akt and p-mTOR in prostate cancer cells.
Taken together, this study reported here provided evidence that knockdown of PEBP4 inhibited hypoxia-induced EMT in prostate cancer cells.
Our study uncovered a novel role for PEBP4 in prostate cancer progression, which might support the potential for PEBP4 targeting in prostate cancer therapy.
Here we found the expression levels of hPEBP4 were positively correlated with the severity of clinical prostate cancer.
Furthermore, hPEBP4 was not expressed in TRAIL-sensitive DU145 prostate cancer cells, but was highly expressed in TRAIL-resistant LNCaP cells, which show highly activated Akt.
Therefore, hPEBP4 expression in prostate cancer can activate Akt and deactivate ERK1/2 signaling, leading to TRAIL resistance.
We also demonstrated that hPEBP4-mediated resistance to TRAIL-induced apoptosis occurred downstream of caspase-8 and at the level of BID cleavage via the regulation of Akt and ERK pathways, and that hPEBP4-regulated ERK deactivation was upstream of Akt activation in prostate cancer cells.
Considering that hPEBP4 confers cellular resistance to TRAIL-induced apoptosis and is abundantly expressed in poorly differentiated prostate cancer, silencing of hPEBP4 suggests a promising approach for prostate cancer treatment.
Six of these mAbs, including anti-cluster of differentiation (CD)61, anti-CD18, anti-CD14, anti-CD235a, anti-CD41 and anti-CD29, cross-reacted with normal feline bone marrow cells, whereas anti-CD33 and anti-CD117 cross-reacted with the blast cells in the bone marrow of two cats with myelodysplastic syndrome, and anti-CD71, anti-235a, anti-41 and anti-42 cross-reacted with immature erythroid cells in a cat with erythroleukaemia.
Incubation of B16F10 melanoma cells with Asm activates p38 MAP kinase (p38K), phospholipase Cx03B3; (PLCx03B3;), ezrin, and extracellular signal-regulated kinases.
Co-incubation of B16F10 melanoma cells with wild-type or Asm-deficient platelets showed that the phosphorylation/activation of p38K is dependent on Asm.
Asm, secreted from activated platelets after tumor cell-platelet contact, induces p38K phosphorylation in tumor cells.
In 1 patient with progressive, idiopathic visual loss, this last-line analysis implicated retinal autoimmunity, a diagnosis that was validated when her serum sample was found to contain antibodies to S-arrestin, a retinal protein and potent cause of autoimmune retinal degeneration.
From 235 Caucasian patients, the homozygous IGHG *bf-n/*bf-n diplotype (B*(bf-n)/B*(bf-n) cells) dominated significantly in 43 IgG2 deficiency (OR 6.0), 32 common variable immunodeficiency (OR 4.6) and 22 Ataxia telangiectasia (OR 3.0) and the IGHG*ga-n/*ga-n diplotype (B*(ga-n)/B*(ga-n) cells) dominated in 53 IgG3 deficiency (OR 10.6) and 21 Wiscott-Aldrich syndrome (OR 4.1).
Additionally, Inos and Slpi expression were unchanged following anti-IFN-Gamma treatment, suggesting that Inos and Slpi regulation is independent of IFN-Gamma during C. difficile colitis.
We have collated and selectively reviewed data on the most prominent well-established and emerging neutrophil-related biomarkers and potential therapeutic targets (calprotectin, lactoferrin, CXCR1, CXCR2, MMP-9, NGAL, elafin, HNE, pANCAs, MPO, CD16, CD177, CD64, HNPs, SLPI and PTX3) in ulcerative colitis.
In order to identify the best strategy to treat IBD using recLAB, we compared the efficacy of different recombinant strains of Lactococcus lactis (the model LAB) secreting two types of anti-inflammatory molecules: cytokines (IL-10 and TGF-Beta1) and serine protease inhibitors (Elafin and Secretory Leukocyte Protease Inhibitor: SLPI), using a dextran sulfate sodium (DSS)-induced mouse model of colitis.
A few natural AMPs were shown to be able to modulate colitis when delivered intravenously or intracolonically (cathelicidin, elafin and SLPI) in mouse colitis models.
As compared with ulcerative colitis, Crohn's disease of the colon is characterized by an impaired induction of beta defensins, and antimicrobial antiproteases elafin and SLPI, as well as the cathelicidin LL37.
The neuronal PAS domain proteins NPAS1 and NPAS3 are members of the basic helix-loop-helix-PER-ARNT-SIM (bHLH-PAS) family, and their genetic deficiencies are linked to a variety of human psychiatric disorders including schizophrenia, autism spectrum disorders and bipolar disease.
Median C(A)NO was significantly higher in SSc patients with alveolitis as compared with SSc patients without alveolitis (8.4ppb; 1st and 3rd interquartile range: 6.0-10.5 vs 3.3ppb; 2.2-3.5; p=0.004 for 2CM and 5.4ppb; 3.2-9.2 vs 3.2ppb; 1.4-3.3, p=0.02 for TMAD), while bronchial airway output of NO (J'awNO, p=0.19), and fractional exhaled NO (F(E)NO, p=0.12) were comparable.
In this present study, one-step quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) and western blotting tests with 10 fresh-frozen laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma (LSCC) samples and immunohistochemistry (IHC) analysis in 109 LSCC cases were performed to investigate the relationship between NDRG3 expression and the clinicopathological characteristics of LSCC.
Results demonstrated that NDRG3 mRNA and protein expression levels were statistically higher in LSCC tissues than that in non-cancerous tissues (all p&lt;0.05).
Univariate and multivariate survival analysis implied that high NDRG3 expression (p=0.004), lymph node metastasis (p=0.044) and TNM stage (p=0.020) were independently associated with the unfavourable overall survival of patients with LSCC.
The above findings suggested that NDRG3 may be identified as a novel biomarker predicting the prognosis of LSCC.
GM1 gangliosidosis and Morquio syndrome type B (MPS IVB) are inherited lyosomal storage disorders associated with deficiency of beta-galactosidase-A (beta GALA) activity.
The results of experiments with the enzyme samples from skin fibroblasts of healthy individuals and of patients with GM1-gangliosidosis (GM1-beta-D-galactosidase deficiency) suggest that Gal-A-sphingenin is a specific substrate for GC.
The evidence suggests that GM1 gangliosidosis is a consequence of mutation at this beta GALA locus on chromosome 3.
A 63-year-old Caucasian man with renal amyloidosis undergoing peripheral blood stem cell collection for an autologous stem cell transplant developed extensive bilateral upper-extremity deep venous thrombosis (DVT) and pulmonary embolism secondary to heparin-induced thrombocytopenia.
Anemia occurred in 61%, thrombocytosis in 16%, pulmonary involvement in 10%, and renal amyloidosis, vasculitis and Felty syndrome were present in 6%, 2% and 1%, respectively.
The CTA, Sperm Protein 17 (SP17), has been found to be aberrantly expressed in different neoplasms, including ovarian and esophageal cancers, nervous system tumors and multiple myeloma, and has been suggested as a candidate target for immunotherapy.
Sperm protein 17 (Sp17) was originally identified by our group as a novel cancer-testis antigen in various malignancies, including multiple myeloma.
We previously identified sperm protein 17 (Sp17) as a normal testicular protein aberrantly expressed in a proportion of multiple myeloma (MM).
Sp17 expression was demonstrated recently in multiple myeloma, suggesting that it may be a novel cancer-testis antigen.
Sperm protein 17 (Sp17) is a highly immunogenic cancer-testis antigen expressed by tumour cells from up to 30% of patients with multiple myeloma (MM).
Sperm protein 17 (Sp17) is a protein recently identified as a novel cancer-testis (CT) antigen in multiple myeloma (MM).
The c.3634+1G&gt;T DIAPH1 mutation causes autosomal dominant nonsyndromic sensorineural hearing loss, DFNA1, characterized by progressive deafness starting in childhood.
We describe 2 unrelated pedigrees with MTP and sensorineural hearing loss that segregate with a DIAPH1 R1213* variant predicting partial truncation of the DIAPH1 diaphanous autoregulatory domain.
BCAS2 cKO mice showed a microcephaly-like phenotype with a reduced volume in the dentate gyrus (DG) and low levels of learning and memory, as evaluated using Morris water maze analysis and passive avoidance, respectively.
The purpose of this study is to determine whether the first trimester maternal serum levels of follistatin like 3 (FSTL3) are altered in patients who develop gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM).
Rodent models suggest that follistatin-like 3 (fstl3) is associated with diabetes and obesity.
In humans, plasma fstl3 is reduced with gestational diabetes.
Plasma fstl3 levels were determined in a cross-sectional study including three groups: patients with type 2 diabetes, impaired glucose tolerance, and healthy controls.
The objective of this study was to determine maternal and placental concentrations of follistatin-like 3 (FSTL3), and, maternal concentrations of myostatin in gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM).
Maternal and placental FSTL3 concentrations were reduced in GDM women compared with normally pregnant women, suggesting FSTL3 may play an important role in the pathogenesis of gestational diabetes.
OBJECTIVE To determine whether maternal levels of follistatin-like-3 (FSTL3), an inhibitor of activin and myostatin involved in glucose homeostasis, are altered in the first trimester of pregnancies complicated by subsequent gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM).
CONCLUSIONS First-trimester FSTL3 levels are associated with glucose intolerance and GDM later in pregnancy.
In contrast, only 2 cases of endocervical adenocarcinoma were positive for PAX2 [invasive adenocarcinoma of the minimal deviation type (0 of 5), usual type (1 of 22), and endometrioid type (1 of 1)].
PAX2 expression in the 2 positive endocervical adenocarcinomas was patchy and weak.
These results suggest that PAX2 immunoreactivity may be useful to (1) distinguish mesonephric hyperplasia from minimal deviation adenocarcinoma, (2) to distinguish lobular endocervical glandular hyperplasia from minimal deviation adenocarcinoma, and (3) to distinguish endocervical tubal metaplasia or cervical endometriosis from endocervical adenocarcinoma in situ.
To this end, translocator protein, a biomarker of inflammation, was imaged by means of positron emission tomography (PET) 2 and 4weeks post-status epilepticus using [18F]-PBR111.
Translocator protein was highly upregulated 2weeks post-status epilepticus in limbic structures (up to 2.1-fold increase compared to controls in temporal lobe, P&lt;0.001), whereas 4weeks post-status epilepticus, upregulation decreased (up to 1.6-fold increase compared to controls in temporal lobe, P&lt;0.01) and was only apparent in a subset of these regions.
Regional PET imaging did not correlate with SRS frequency, however, by applying a multivariate data-driven modeling approach based on translocator protein PET imaging at 2weeks post-status epilepticus, we accurately predicted the frequency of SRS (R=0.92; R2=0.86; P&lt;0.0001) at the onset of epilepsy.
TSPO expression, microglial activation, astrocyte reactivity and cell loss in several brain regions were evaluated at five time points during epileptogenesis, including the chronic epilepsy phase in the kainic acid-induced status epilepticus (KASE) model (n = 52) and control Wistar Han rats (n = 33).
In 2 patients with severe exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, cerulein had no effect on the concentration of plasma amino acids, whereas the addition of glucagon caused a marked decrease.
For example, there was an increase in the expression of ERG, K(v)LQT1, K(ir)2.4, TASK1, TWIK1, TWIK2, calsequestrin 2, and the A1 adenosine receptor in the SAN that could explain the slowing of the intrinsic heart rate.
Our results show a significant over-expression of SphK1 mRNA and protein expression in the carcinomas compared with adenomas (P &lt; 0.01 for all comparisons).
To evaluate the role of sphingosine kinase 1 (SphK1) in insulin secretion, we used stable transfection to knock down the expression of the Sphk1 gene in the rat insulinoma INS-1 832/13 cell line.
In rat uterine leiomyoma cells (ELT3), SphK1/S1P axis controls survival and proliferation.
A role for SPHK activity in beta-cell growth was confirmed when small interfering (si)SPHK2 RNA transfection reduced rat insulinoma INS-1e cell SPHK levels and activity and cell growth.
Adenomas had higher expression of SphK1 vs. normal mucosa, and colon cancers with metastasis had higher expression of SphK1 than those without metastasis.
Adenoma size but not incidence was dramatically reduced in Apc Min/+ Sphk(-/-) mice.
Concomitantly, epithelial cell proliferation in the polyps was significantly attenuated, suggesting that Sphk1 regulates adenoma progression.
Interestingly, tissue sphingosine content was elevated in the adenomas of Apc Min/+ Sphk1(-/-) mice, whereas S1P levels were not significantly altered.
These findings highlight the critical role of miR-137-c-Met nexus in CRC development and reveal Mecp2-regulated epigenetic silence causes the downregulation of miR-137 in colorectal adenoma and carcinoma.
In this study we examined the expression of c-MET in colorectal adenomas, primary adenocarcinomas and their corresponding lymph node, peritoneal and liver metastases.
Twenty three cases of colorectal adenoma and 102 cases of primary colorectal carcinoma and their corresponding metastases (44 lymph nodes, 21 peritoneal deposits and 16 liver metastases) were studied to evaluate c-MET expression by immunohistochemistry.
Expression of c-MET was positive in 47.8% of adenomas.
c-MET expression is gradually up-regulated in the development and progression of colorectal cancer (CRC) from normal epithelium to adenoma to colorectal carcinoma to metastases.
The positive rate of F-FDG PET/CT in patients with somatostatin analog treatment, radiosurgery, transsphenoidal surgery, and microadenoma was 63% (5/8), 50% (1/2), 33% (4/12), and 48%(10/21), respectively, while that of C-MET PET/CT was 86% (6/7), 50% (1/2), 100% (12/12), and 100% (21/21), respectively.
In the 9 patients with a recurrent microadenoma, the positive rate of F-FDG PET/CT was as low as 22% while that of C-MET PET/CT was 100%.
C-MET PET/CT can provide valuable diagnostic information when F-FDG PET/CT yields negative results, especially in patients with recurrent microadenomas.
Also, increased phospho-HLXB9 coincided with reduced Cblb and increased c-Met in insulinomas of two mouse models of menin loss.
These mechanisms have therapeutic implications for reducing Beta-cell proliferation in insulinomas by inhibiting phospho-HLXB9 or its interaction with Nono and modulating the expression of its direct (Cblb) or indirect (c-Met) targets.
The common SNPs tested in DDOST, PRKCSH and LGALS3 do not seem to be associated with diabetic micro- or macrovascular complications or with type 1 diabetes in Finnish patients.
Loss of CD26 (&gt;=80% CD4(+) T cells) and/or CD7 (&gt;=40% CD4(+) T cells) and combination of altered expression of STAT4, TWIST1, and DNM3 or PLS3 could distinguish, respectively, 83% and 98% of patients with Sezary syndrome from patients with erythrodermic inflammatory dermatoses with 100% specificity.
Sezary Syndrome (SS/L-CTCL) is a rare but aggressive variant of cutaneous T cell lymphoma (CTCL), characterized by erythroderma, lymphadenopathy, and the presence of a circulating memory CD4(+) T cell malignant clone with a skin homing behavior, lacking CD26 and CD49d and over-expressing CD60.
By using flow cytometry with markers for CD3, CD4, CD26, and CD7, we examined the blood samples of 109 patients for abnormal T cells: 69 patients with mycosis fungoides (MF)/Sezary syndrome (SS), 31 hospitalized control subjects, and 9 patients with inflammatory skin disease.
Individuals with Down syndrome (DS) have an increased risk of early-onset Alzheimer's Disease (AD), largely owing to a triplication of the APP gene, located on chromosome 21.
The ABeta4-x staining pattern was restricted mainly to amyloid plaque cores and cerebral amyloid angiopathy in AD and Down syndrome cases and in both AD mouse models.
This review focuses on the role of ABeta in AD pathogenesis in Down syndrome and current approaches for imaging ABeta in vivo.
Alzheimer's disease (AD) may affect in excess of 90% of individuals with Down syndrome (DS) after age 60, due to duplication of the APP gene in trisomy of chromosome 21, with neuropathology that is comparable to Sporadic AD and Familial AD (FAD).
In addition, adhesion of lymphoma cells to fibronectin or stroma cells (HS-5 cells) decreased CKIP-1 expression, which led to the upregulation of Akt phosphorylation.
This study was performed to evaluate the potential association of the tumor necrosis factor alpha inducible protein 3gene (TNFAIP3) polymorphisms with Fuchs' heterochromic iridocyclitis (Fuchs' Syndrome) in a Chinese Han population.
Structural studies of collagen IV have been utilized to differentiate between subepidermal blistering diseases, including bullous pemphigoid, acquired epidermolysis bullosa, anti-epiligrin cicatricial pemphigoid, and bullous lupus erythematosus.
Anti-epiligrin cicatricial pemphigoid is an autoimmune blistering disorder that has recently been associated with the development of solid organ malignancy.
Anti-epiligrin cicatricial pemphigoid (AECP) is a chronic, mucous membrane-dominated, subepithelial blistering disease characterized by circulating anti-basement membrane zone auto-antibodies to laminin 5.
Recently, it has been reported that patients with MMP who have autoantibodies to laminin 5, known as anti-epiligrin cicatricial pemphigoid (AECP) have a high incidence of malignancy.
Anti-epiligrin cicatricial pemphigoid (AECP) is a chronic, autoimmune, subepidermal blistering disease characterized by circulating anti-basement membrane autoantibodies to laminin 5.
To report an anti-epiligrin cicatricial pemphigoid (AECP) patient with severe ocular involvement and to provide a practical approach to distinguishing AECP patients from those with other subepidermal blistering diseases.
A subset, known as anti-epiligrin cicatricial pemphigoid is associated with a high risk for malignancy.
In 14 cases of hidradenitis suppurativa, cytokeratin (CK) expression was studied immunohistochemically, using six antikeratin antibodies against CK1, CK10, CK14, CK16, CK17 and CK19, respectively.
Recessive mutations in CLN7/MFSD8 usually cause variant late-infantile onset neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (vLINCL), a poorly understood neurodegenerative condition, though mutations may also cause nonsyndromic maculopathy.
A series of 12 patients with nonsyndromic retinopathy due to novel CLN7/MFSD8 mutation combinations were investigated in this study.
The NCL family of proteins is comprised of lysosomal enzymes (PPT1/CLN1, TPP1/CLN2, CTSD/CLN10, CTSF/CLN13), proteins that peripherally associate with membranes (DNAJC5/CLN4, KCTD7/CLN14), a soluble lysosomal protein (CLN5), a protein present in the secretory pathway (PGRN/CLN11), and several proteins that display different subcellular localizations (CLN3, CLN6, MFSD8/CLN7, CLN8, ATP13A2/CLN12).
Here, we performed a detailed analysis of retinal degeneration in mice deficient in the lysosomal membrane protein CLN7, a novel animal model of CLN7 disease.
We conclude that the retina of CLN7-deficient mice represents a useful model to elucidate the pathomechanisms ultimately leading to neurodegeneration in CLN7 disease, and to evaluate the efficacy of strategies aimed at developing treatments for this fatal neurodegenerative lysosomal storage disorder.
After sequence alignment and variant calling against the canine reference genome, variants were identified in the coding region or splicing regions of four previously known NCL genes (CLN6, ARSG, CLN2 [=TPP1], and CLN7 [=MFSD8]).
Because of the similarities of the clinical signs and histopathological changes with the human form of the disease, we propose that the Chihuahua dog could be a good animal model of CLN7 disease.
CLN7 disease is an autosomal recessive, childhood-onset neurodegenerative lysosomal storage disorder caused by the defective lysosomal membrane protein CLN7.
We have disrupted the Cln7/Mfsd8 gene in mice by targeted deletion of exon 2 generating a novel knockout (KO) mouse model for CLN7 disease, which recapitulates key features of human CLN7 disease pathology.
Phenotypic studies comprised epileptic seizures and movement disorders, ophthalmology, neurophysiology, image analysis, rating scales, enzyme testing, and electron microscopy, carried out under a consensus algorithm; 2) DNA screening and validation of mutations in genes PPT1 (CLN1), TPP1 (CLN2), CLN3, CLN5, CLN6, MFSD8 (CLN7), and CLN8: characterization of variant types, novel/known mutations and polymorphisms; 3) Progress of the epidemiological picture in Latin America; and 4) NCL-like pathology studies in progress.
In several genome-wide association studies, nonalcoholic fatty liver disease and alanine aminotransferase susceptibility variants have been identified in several genes, including LYPLAL1, ZP4, GCKR, HSD17B13, PALLD, PPP1R3B, FDFT1, TRIB1, COL13A1, CPN1, ERLIN1, CWF19L1, EFCAB4B, PZP, and NCAN.
Recent efforts to develop cure for chronic diabetic complications have led to the discovery of potent inhibitors against aldose reductase (AKR1B1, EC 1.1.1.21) whose role in diabetes is well-evident.
Beta catenin, phosducin and aldehyde reductase were increased in expression in diabetes whilst succinyl coA ligase and dihydropyrimidase-related protein were decreased.
The crystal structures of porcine and human aldehyde reductase, an enzyme implicated in complications of diabetes, have been determined by X-ray diffraction methods.
Data from a validation cohort of&gt;10,000 patients showed age-dependent androgen receptor levels and a prevalence of SRs affecting androgen-regulated genes, further substantiating the activity of a characteristic "androgen-type" pathomechanism in EO-PCA.
These induced Tfm (iTfm) animals also displayed more anxiety-like behaviors than WTs.
When tested in the resting phase, iTfms appeared more anxious than WTs in the open field, novel object and elevated plus maze tests, but not the light/dark box.
However, when tested during the active phase (lights off), iTfms showed more anxiety-related behavior than WTs in all four tests.
Data from a validation cohort of &gt; 10,000 patients showed age-dependent androgen receptor levels and a prevalence of SRs affecting androgen-regulated genes, further substantiating the activity of a characteristic "androgen-type" pathomechanism in EO-PCA.
Second, the structural similarity between the ligand-binding sites of AR and its mutated forms and closely related steroid receptors (SRs) such as progesterone receptors presents challenges for the development of drugs with receptor-selective function.
This conference report highlights selected presentations on the development of the third-generation camptothecin analog TH-1320 (Threshold Pharmaceuticals Inc), the silencing of the androgen receptor in prostate cancer by the novel locked nucleic acid-based antisense oligonucleotide EZN-4176 (Enzon Pharmaceuticals Inc/Santaris Pharma A/S), the inhibition of PC-3 cell invasiveness and metastasis by the CXCR4 antagonist CTCE-9908 (British Canadian BioSciences Corp), the antitumor efficacy of the CDH3 mAb PPMX-2017 (Perseus Proteomics Inc), and an anti-IL-6 mAb (MedImmune LLC) that suppresses tumor growth in vivo.
Furthermore, NDCBE has an important role in the prevention of hypokalemia.
Because NCC and NDCBE are both thiazide targets, the combined inhibition of NCC and the NDCBE/pendrin system may explain thiazide-induced hypokalemia in some patients.
We recently developed a systems biological approach to vaccine safety evaluation where identification of specific biomarkers in a rat pre-clinical study evaluated the safety of vaccines for pandemic H5N1 influenza including Irf7, Lgals9, Lgalsbp3, Cxcl11, Timp1, Tap2, Psmb9, Psme1, Tapbp, C2, Csf1, Mx2, Zbp1, Ifrd1, Trafd1, Cxcl9, Beta2m, Npc1, Ngfr and Ifi47.
Here we report that enhanced expression of PA28alpha at a level similar to that obtained after IFN-gamma induction resulted in a marked enhancement of recognition by pp89-specific cytotoxic T cells; the presentation of influenza nucleoprotein was also significantly improved.
Two different cardiologists measured corrected QT (QTc), QT dispersion (QTd), QT peak (QTp), T wave peak to T wave end (TpTe), TpTe/QT ratio, and TpTe/QTc ratio in 12-lead ECG.Results: When compared with the control group, QTp (P: 0.021), QT (P: 0.003), TpTe (P &lt; 0.001), TpTe/QTc ratio (P &lt; 0.001), and TpTe/QT ratio (P: 0.005) were significantly higher in patients with myocarditis.
The area under the curve (AUC) of the electrocardiographic characteristics QT (AUC: 0.736; 95% CI [0.600-0.846]), QTP (AUC: 0.680; 95% CI [0.540-0.799]), and TpTe (AUC: 0.771; 95% CI [0.638-873]) and TpTe/QTc (AUC: 0.774; 95% CI [0.641-0.876]) and TpTe/QT (AUC: 0.726; 95% CI [0.589-0.838]) in myocarditis were not significantly different from each other but all of them were different from 0.5.Conclusion: Baseline ECGs of patients with myocarditis were associated with repolarization abnormalities.
Some previous studies have proposed the electrocardiographic Tpeak-Tend (TpTe) as a possible predictor of ventricular arrhythmic events in patients with Brugada syndrome (BrS).
The binding of methotrexate (MTX) to IgG in conjugates was examined by studies on a direct MTX conjugate with a monoclonal antibody (aMM46) to mouse mammary tumor MM46 cells and corresponding irrelevant antibody and normal gamma-globulin conjugates, all prepared by the active ester method with MTX N-succinimidyl ester (MTX-OSu).
The majority of the loci can be linked to genes related to immune cell function and to myelin and neural growth; some (SYK, MYT1L, TRAPPC9, SLITKR6 and RIC3) have been previously associated with the distribution of white matter lesions in multiple sclerosis.
To gain insight into the function of the native CCDC28A gene, we collected information on any differential expression of CCDC28A among normal hematologic cell types and within subgroups of acute leukemia.
They also suggested selective enrichment of CCDC28A in the French-American-British M6 class of human acute leukemia.
APOA1, SFRP4, and PAPPA, which are normally down-regulated by hCG were up-regulated by hCG in animals with endometriosis.
Here, we review the biological relevance of Sox2 and Sox9 genes in osteosarcoma, chondrosarcoma and chordoma; Sox2, Sox6, and Sox17 genes in Ewing's sarcoma; Sox2, Sox9, and Sox10 genes in synovial sarcoma; Sox2 gene in fibrosarcoma; and Sox21 gene in liposarcoma.
The objective of this study was to analyze circadian patterns of urinary 6-sulphatoxymelatonin (aMT6s) excretion in children with primary sleep disorders in comparison with healthy controls.
Four different melatonin (aMT) production and excretion patterns were distinguished in the group with sleep disorders: (1) standard aMT production pattern, (2) low aMT production pattern, (3) aMT production pattern with absence of circadian variation, and (4) aMT hyperproduction pattern.
This study highlights the importance of analyzing specific alterations of aMT secretion in each sleep disorder and provides evidences to explain why not all children with sleep disturbances do respond to aMT treatment.
Here we describe a case of EME caused by NKH in which a new mutation in aminomethyltransferase (AMT) gene has been detected.
Alipogene tiparvovec (Glybera(R); AMT-011, AAV1-LPL(S447X)) is an adeno-associated virus serotype 1-based gene therapy for adult patients with familial lipoprotein lipase (LPL) deficiency (LPLD) and suffering from severe or multiple pancreatitis attacks despite dietary fat restrictions.
Glycine encephalopathy (GCE) or nonketotic hyperglycinemia is an inborn error of glycine metabolism, inherited in an autosomal recessive manner due to a defect in any one of the four enzymes aminomethyltransferase (AMT), glycine decarboxylase (GLDC), glycine cleavage system protein-H (GCSH) and dehydrolipoamide dehydrogenase in the glycine cleavage system.
Leucine-rich alpha-2-glycoprotein-1 (encoded by LRG1) has been shown to be involved in multiple cancer progression and angiogenesis.
LRG1 has been shown to be one of the five plasma proteins that can be used for colorectal cancer (CRC) diagnosis.
To investigate the relationship between tumor regression grade (TRG) and lymph node regression grade (LRG) after neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy (CRT) for rectal cancer and its clinical implication.
TRG and LRG of postoperative specimens (including tumor and lymph nodes) were carried out based on the percentage of the fibrosis and the cancer residue.
No cancer residue was defined as TRG1 and LRG1; rare cancer cell residue as TRG2 and LRG2; fibrosis growth over residual cancer as TRG3 and LRG3; residual cancer growth over fibrosis as TRG4 and LRG4; absence of regressive changes as TRG5 and LRG5; and normal lymph nodes as LRG0.
Therefore, both TRG and LRG should be assessed when evaluating the response of rectal cancer to neoadjuvant CRT.
The plasma level of LRG1 was significantly increased in CRC patients, but it was remarkably decreased in patients with resected colorectal cancers.
In addition, LRG1 silencing led to the downregulation of the levels of key cell cycle factors, such as cyclin D1, B, and E and anti-apoptotic B-cell lymphoma-2(Bcl-2).
We conclude that the LRG system may be an independent predictive factor of long-term oncologic outcomes of rectal cancer patients after NT and radical surgery.
Leucine-rich-alpha-2-glycoprotein 1 (LRG1) has been reported to be involved in several tumors, whether it participates in colorectal cancer (CRC) progression remains unclear.
LRG1 was overexpressed in CRC tissues and associated with cancer aggressiveness.
Leucine-rich-alpha-2-glycoprotein1 (LRG1) is a novel oncogene-associated protein which has been clarified vital to the progression of human cancers, but its role in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) remains unclear.
those of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PDH; EC 1.1.1.49), lactic dehydrogenase (LDH; EC 1.1.1.27), pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDC) and citrate synthase (CS; EC 4.1.3.7) were estimated in posterior root ganglion cells (PRGCs) of the spinal cord in patients suffering from olivopontocerebellar atrophy (OPCA), amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), and Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) by means of the NAD, NADP and CoA cycling methods.
Three cell lines were examined in detail: two human glioblastoma cell lines, GB-1 and GB-2, and one gliosarcoma cell line, GS-1.
We first created a paclitaxel-resistant, triple-negative breast cancer cell line [paclitaxel-resistant MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells (231-TXL)] from drug-sensitive control MDA-MB-231 cells (231-CON).
To investigate therapeutic potential of such nanoparticle mediated delivery system, we examined the efficacy of dual drug-loaded, pH and thermo liable lipid coated mesoporous iron oxide-based magnetic nanoassemblies (DOX:TXL-LMMNA) in mice bearing both drug sensitive (A2780(S)) and drug resistant (A2780-CisR) ovarian cancer tumor xenografts.
Here we report the histone deacetylase inhibitor apicidin (APC) or ER stressor thapsigargin (TG) potentiate paclitaxel (TXL)-induced apoptosis in PCa cells and limit accumulation of cancer stem cells.
Taken together, combination treatment with TXL and either APC or TG induces efficient apoptosis in both proliferating and cancer stem cells, suggesting this therapeutic combination may overcome drug resistance and recurrence in PCa.
Analysis of the DHS sequences uncovers one mutation (chr18: 52417839G&gt;C) in the tumour cells of a patient with follicular thyroid carcinoma, which affects the binding of the tumour suppressor protein p53 and correlates with decreased expression of its target gene TXNL1.
The in vitro cytotoxic effect, the ROS generation level and cell cycle distribution analysis of DOX:TXL-MMNPs and DOX:Cis-Pt-MMNPs treated MDA-MB231, MCF-7 and PC3 cancer cells are demonstrated.
The objective of this study was to determine if and how ROS contribute to jadomycin cytotoxicity in drug-sensitive MCF7 (MCF7-CON) and taxol-resistant MCF7 (MCF7-TXL) breast cancer cells.
Our previous work identified thioredoxin-like protein 2 (Txl-2), a novel thioredoxin family member, as the target of the monoclonal antibody MC3 which can detect colon cancer with high sensitivity and specificity.
In vivo studies validated that Txl-2b expression promoted colon cancer tumorigenesis in nude mice.
Overall, our results indicate that Txl-2b expression stimulates cancer cell proliferation, accelerates the cell cycle and contributes to apoptosis resistance in colon cancer and provides a potential therapeutic target for colon cancer treatment.
Our data showed that the expression of TXNL1 in the cisplatin resistant gastric cancer cell lines BGC823/DDP and SGC7901/DDP cells was significantly lower compared with the cisplatin sensitive cell lines BGC823 and SGC7901.
In conclusion, these findings suggest that TXNL1 was a feasible modulator and potential chemotherapeutic target for the cisplatin resistant phenotype of human gastric cancer cells.
In addition, nongenomic estrogen signaling pathways mediated by orphan receptors (eg, GPR30 and ERRAlfa) has also been implicated in prostate cancer progression.
Previously, we reported that GPR30 activation by the receptor-specific, non-estrogenic ligand G-1 inhibited in vitro and in vivo growth of prostate cancer (PCa) cells via sustained Erk1/2 activation.
The aim of this study was to identify the expression, cellular localization and regulation of classic estrogen receptors ERAlfa and ERBeta, ER-Alfa36 isoform and GPER in the androgen-independent prostate cancer cell line PC-3.
In contrast, these cells express classical (Alfa and/or Beta) and novel (GPR30) estrogen receptors, which may represent new putative targets in prostate cancer treatment.In the present review, we discuss the still-debated mechanisms, both genomic and non-genomic, by which androgen and estradiol receptors (classical and novel) mediate the hormonal control of prostate cell stemness, transformation, and the continued growth of prostate cancer.
Extracellular fibrinolysis, controlled by the cell-associated fibrinolytic system (urokinase plasminogen activator, uPA; uPA receptor, uPAR; plasminogen activator inhibitor type-1, PAI-1), is involved in cartilage damage generation and in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) synovitis.
We report the arthroscopic treatment of pigmented villonodular synovitis (PVNS) in a 13-year-old Japanese boy with congenital partial deficiency of plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1).
Sinoatrial nodes (SANs) and pulmonary veins (PVs) play a critical role in the pathophysiology of atrial fibrillation.
Since it was previously proposed that increased SOXB2 proteins level interfere with the activity of SOXB1 counteracting partners, we compared expression patterns of SOXB members during retinoic acid induction of embryonal carcinoma cells.
Data presented here provide an insight into SOX14 expression during in vitro neural differentiation of embryonal carcinoma cells and demonstrate the effect of its ectopic expression on protein levels of SOXB members in HeLa cells.
Experiments with human embryonal carcinoma cells identified two response elements involved in retinoic acid/retinoid X receptor-dependent activation of the SOX3 gene expression: distal atypical retinoic acid-response element, consisting of two unique G-rich boxes separated by 49 bp, and proximal element comprising DR-3-like motif, composed of two imperfect hexameric half-sites.
We have previously shown that early phases of differentiation and neural induction of NT2/D1 embryonal carcinoma cells by retinoic acid (RA) involve up-regulation of the SOX3 gene expression.
Analysis of brain tissues from HIV-1-infected patients validated these findings, and showed transcriptional upregulation of Rac1 and cortactin, as well as increased activation of Rac1 in brain tissues of HIV-1-infected humans, compared to seronegative individuals and subjects with HIV-1-encephalitis.
Rho-GDI2, Rab2 and Cofilin1 were found to be associated with down-regulated and naive group phenotypes; Cortactin and Fibrinogen beta-Chain Precursor were found to be associated with down-regulated and group-related IFN-treated RR-MS phenotypes.
The objective of this study was to investigate the effect of genes previously identified as risk alleles, including microtubule-associated protein tau, myelin-associated oligodendrocyte basic protein, eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2-alpha kinase 3, and syntaxin 6, as well as apolipoprotein E, on cognitive function in progressive supranuclear palsy.
Atlastin 1 (ATL1, also known as SPG3A) encodes an ER membrane fusion GTPase and reticulon 2 (RTN2, also known as SPG12) helps shape ER tube formation.
Protrudin was found to interact with other HSP-related proteins including myelin proteolipid protein 1 (SPG2), atlastin-1 (SPG3A), REEP1 (SPG31), REEP5 (similar to REEP1), Kif5A (SPG10), Kif5B, Kif5C, and reticulon 1, 3, and 4 (similar to reticulon 2, SPG12).
Although more than 50 genetic loci are known [spastic gait (SPG)1 to -57], over half of hereditary spastic paraplegia cases are caused by pathogenic mutations in four genes encoding proteins that function in tubular endoplasmic reticulum (ER) network formation: atlastin-1 (SPG3A), spastin (SPG4), reticulon 2 (SPG12), and receptor expression-enhancing protein 1 (SPG31).
SPG3A/Atlastin, SPG4/Spastin, SPG12/reticulon 2, and SPG31/REEP1, all of which interact); (3) mitochondrial function (e.g.
RNase 1 and 3 were higher in respiratory failure than without respiratory failure (p &lt; 0.0001 and p = 0.02, respectively).
At least 30% of purified product RNA shows resistance to degradation by ribonuclease A and T1 before and after annealing with exogenous RNA from influenza virions.
Circulating miR-122 was associated with prevalent insulin resistance, obesity, metabolic syndrome, type 2 diabetes, and an adverse lipid profile.
Over up to 15 years of follow-up in the Bruneck Study, multivariable adjusted risk ratios per one-SD higher log miR-122 were 1.60 (95% CI 1.30-1.96; P &lt; 0.001) for metabolic syndrome and 1.37 (1.03-1.82; P = 0.021) for type 2 diabetes.
In conclusion, circulating miR-122 is strongly associated with the risk of developing metabolic syndrome and type 2 diabetes in the general population.
Tricho-hepato-enteric syndrome (THES) is a rare disorder caused by mutations in the TTC37 or SKIV2L genes and characterized by chronic diarrhea, liver disease, hair abnormalities, and high mortality in early childhood due to severe infection or liver cirrhosis.
Physicians must be aware of THES when they encounter a patient with infantile diarrhea, hair abnormalities, immune deficiency, mental retardation, and liver disease.
Two neonates, born to nonconsanguineous parents, suffered from intractable diarrhea, recurrent infections, and massive hematemesis from esopharyngeal varices due to liver cirrhosis or accompanying Trichorrhexis nodosa that developed with age and thus guided the diagnosis of SD/THE compatible to TTC37 mutations (homozygous DelK1155H, Fs*2; heterozygous Y1169Ter and InsA1143, Fs*3).
Trichohepatoenteric syndrome (THES) is an autosomal-recessive disorder characterized by life-threatening diarrhea in infancy, immunodeficiency, liver disease, trichorrhexis nodosa, facial dysmorphism, hypopigmentation, and cardiac defects.
In this report, transfection of tau plasmids into human neuroblastoma SK-N-SH cells caused a significant reduction in the messenger RNA (mRNA) levels of several Kv channels, including Kv2.1, Kv3.1, Kv5.1, Kv9.2, and KCNH4.
Three staff physicians and 22 gastroenterology fellows classified eight randomly assigned unknown still ECS pictures (two images per each classification) into one of four histopathologic categories as follows: (1) BEC1-squamous epithelium; (2) BEC2-BE without dysplasia; (3) BEC3-BE with dysplasia; and (4) BEC4-esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC) in BE.
Five hundred and fifteen LD SCLC patients were randomised to receive five vaccinations of Bec2 (2.5mg)/BCG vaccine arm (VA) or an observational arm (OA) administered over a 10-week period.
We found no benefits to patient HRQOL by additional vaccination with Bec2/BCG to LD SCLC for patients who have been undergoing standard therapy.
This article reviews the following seven vaccines, which have entered randomized trials: L-BLP25 (Stimuvax), BEC-2, 1E10, PF-3512676 (Promune), melanoma-associated antigen A3 immunotherapeutic, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor-transduced allogeneic cancer cellular immunotherapy, and belagenpumatucel-L (Lucanix).
We assessed whether Bec2/bacille Calmette-Guerin (BCG) vaccination prolongs survival in patients with limited-disease small-cell lung cancer (SCLC) after a major response to chemotherapy and chest radiation.
Vaccination with Bec2/BCG has no impact on outcome of patients with limited-disease SCLC responding to combined-modality treatment.
Twenty-four melanoma patients were randomized to be immunized with either BEC2 followed by GD3-L-KLH or in the opposite order.
Therefore, this investigation was designed to examine the excitatory effect of PGE1 on signal transmission in neuroblastoma x glioma hybrid cells (NG 108-15) overexpressing Phd.
Mothers and fathers of twins are personally interviewed about their lifetime history of DSM-III-R alcoholism, antisocial personality disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, major depression, panic disorder/agoraphobia, social phobia, and simple phobia using a modified version of the SCID and the DIS.
Patients with untreated disorders were identified using the Q-DIS-III-R to diagnose six DIS-anxiety disorders (generalized anxiety disorder, post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), simple phobia, social phobia, panic/agoraphobia, obsessive/compulsive disorder) and major depression.
C-DIS kappas ranged from -.05 for generalized anxiety to .70 for simple phobia.
Duke Epidemiologic Catchment Area (ECA) data were used to examine the relationships between: (a) early childhood maternal death, paternal death, and parental separation/divorce, and (b) six-month DIS/DSM-III diagnoses of agoraphobia with and without panic attacks, simple phobia, social phobia, panic disorder, generalised anxiety disorder, and obsessive-compulsive disorder.
Since SNP rs12587742 is located within the promoter region and one CpG island of DCAF4, we further performed in silico functional analyses and found that the rs12587742 variant A allele was associated with an increased mRNA expression (P = 2.20 x 10-16, 1.79 x 10-13 and 0.001 in blood cells, normal lung tissues and tumor tissues of lung squamous carcinoma, respectively) and a decreased methylation status (P = 2.48 x 10-9 and 0.032 in adipose and lung tumor tissues, respectively).
Moreover, evidence from differential expression analyses further supported an oncogenic effect of DCAF4 on lung cancer, with higher mRNA levels in both lung squamous carcinoma and adenocarcinoma (P = 4.48 x 10-11 and 1.22 x 10-9, respectively) than in adjacent normal tissues.
Here we infer the potential impact of 19 well-defined DCAFs in human lung adenocarcinomas (LuADCs) using integrative omics analyses, and discover that mRNA levels of DTL, DCAF4, 12 and 13 are consistently elevated whereas VBRBP is reduced in LuADCs compared to normal lung tissues.
In addition, six of eight patients with both lymphopenia and malar rash had anti-Gal-8 in their sera.
To explore the expression and correlation of RAR-beta receptor and galectin-8 in acquired middle ear cholesteatoma, and to evaluate their roles in the formation of middle ear cholesteatoma.
Tissue specimens from 42 cases of acquired middle ear cholesteatoma and 18 cases of external ear skin were examined by immunohistochemical SABC method for RAR-beta receptors and galectin-8, also by Western Blot for these two factors.
These clinicopathological features were significantly different from 154 randomly chosen CD200-negative mantle cell lymphoma patients, in SOX11 positivity (24% versus 74%, P&lt;0.0001), CD23 expression (76% versus 8%, P&lt;0.0001), a non-nodal leukemic presentation (44% versus 2%, P&lt;0.001), and therapy requirement (50% versus 92%, P&lt;0.0001).
Deregulated expression of SOX11 has been shown to be involved in the progression of various types of cancer.
However, the role of SOX11 in head and neck cancer remains largely unknown.
In this study, coimmunoprecipitation (Co-IP) and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) were performed to identify the proteins that bind to SOX11 at significantly higher levels in head and neck cancer cells than in normal human oral keratinocytes.
The binding of HSP90Alfa with SOX11 in head and neck cancer cells was validated by Co-IP with western blotting.
Collectively, our studies indicate that SOX11 binds to HSP90Alfa, a highly overexpressed protein that may promote invasion and progression of head and neck cancer cells.
Here, we show that SOX11, an embryonic mammary marker that is normally silent in postnatal breast cells, is expressed in many oestrogen receptor-negative preinvasive ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) lesions.
DCIS.com cells engineered to express SOX11 showed increased ALDH activity, which is a feature of cancer stem cells.
Invasive lesions formed sooner and tumour growth was augmented in vivo, suggesting that SOX11 contributes to the progression of DCIS to invasive breast cancer.
Our findings suggest that SOX11 is a potential biomarker for DCIS lesions containing cells harbouring distinct biological features that are likely to progress to invasive breast cancer.
The expression levels of P-gp and its encoded gene mdr1a/b were significantly up-regulated on the brain of KA-induced chronic epilepsy rats or the epilepsy rats treated with CBZ for 1 week, meanwhile with a high expression of PXR.
The treatment of PMA dramatically reduced both PXR and P-gp expressions at the protein and mRNA levels in the chronic epilepsy brain.
This study demonstrates for the first time that P-gp up-regulation is due to increase PXR expression in the chronic phase of epilepsy, differently from that NF-KB signaling may induce the P-gp expression in the acute seizure phase.
We therefore investigated the expression and function of pregnane xenobiotic (PXR) and glucocorticoid (GR) nuclear receptors in endothelial cells established from post-epilepsy surgery brain samples.
The objective was to examine the link between selected single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 69789A/G rs 7643645 and 66034T/C rs 13059232 hPXR and the lack of response to epilepsy treatment.
The distribution of genotypes of the 66034T/C rs 13059232 hPXR polymorphism was significantly different in the group with drug-resistant epilepsy and the control group.
Twelve single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) involved in LTG metabolism and transport pathways, including UGT2B7, ABCB1, ABCG2, NR1I2 and HNF4Alfa were genotyped in 140 Chinese epilepsy patients.
To observe the expression of trophinin in the cycling endometrium and investigate its relationship with infertility.
Trophinin expression in the endometrium was observed in 39 normal cycling women during different menstrual phases and 24 women with infertility during mid-luteal phase by immunohistochemical technique.
In comparison with normal women, infertile women with endometriosis or unexplained infertility had significantly weakened trophinin expression in the endometrium in the mid-luteal (P&lt;0.001).
Trophinin may play an important role in the process of implantation, and abnormal endometrial trophinin expression might be one of the major causes of infertility.
Griscelli syndrome (GS) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder caused by mutation in the MYO5A (GS1), RAB27A (GS2), and MLPH (GS3) genes, characterized by a common feature, partial albinism.
Many of these were not previously associated with skin disease in the organ (Mysm1, Vangl1, Trpc4ap, Nom1, Sparc, Farp2, and Prkab1), while others were ascribed new cutaneous functions on the basis of the screening approach (Krt76, Lrig1, Myo5a, Nsun2, and Nf1).
Extensive tumoral calcinosis affecting a large joint is uncommon in patients with systemic sclerosis.
We review 8 of the following diseases linked to defects in the synthesis of O-xylosylglycans, O-N acetylgalactosaminylglycans, O-xylosyl/N-acetylglycans, O-mannosylglycans, and O-fucosylglycans: multiple exostoses, progeroid variant of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, progeria, familial tumoral calcinosis, Schneckenbecken dysplasia, Walker-Warburg syndrome, spondylocostal dysostosis type 3, and Peter's plus syndrome.
Here we describe a case of EME caused by NKH in which a new mutation in aminomethyltransferase (AMT) gene has been detected.
Glycine encephalopathy (GCE) or nonketotic hyperglycinemia is an inborn error of glycine metabolism, inherited in an autosomal recessive manner due to a defect in any one of the four enzymes aminomethyltransferase (AMT), glycine decarboxylase (GLDC), glycine cleavage system protein-H (GCSH) and dehydrolipoamide dehydrogenase in the glycine cleavage system.
We recently identified that the KITENIN/ErbB4-Dvl2-c-Jun axis works as a novel unconventional downstream signal of epidermal growth factor (EGF) in colorectal cancer (CRC) tissues.
Hypermethylation of AXIN2, DKK1, VANGL1, and WNT5A gene promoters was higher, while those of SOX17, PRICKLE1, DAAM2, and MYC was lower in colon carcinoma compared to adenoma.
KITENIN (KAI1 C-terminal interacting tetraspanin) increases the invasiveness of colorectal cancer cells, and we identified a novel EGFR-independent oncogenic signal of EGF that works under coexpressed KITENIN and ErbB4.
Furthermore, the mRNA expression of KITENIN and that of ErbB4-CYT-2 were positively correlated in human colorectal cancer tissue.
Elevated coexpression of KITENIN and ErbB4-CYT-2 promotes the transition of colon adenoma to adenocarcinoma within an APC loss-associated tumor microenvironment.
KAI1 COOH-terminal interacting tetraspanin (KITENIN) contributes to tumor progression and poor clinical outcomes in various cancers including colorectal cancer.
The aim of the present study was to evaluate whether KITENIN affects tumor angiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis in colorectal cancer.
A KITENIN small interfering RNA vector was used to silence KITENIN expression in colorectal cancer cell lines including DLD1 and SW480 cells.
Immunohistochemistry was used to determine the expression of KITENIN in colorectal cancer tissues.
These results suggest that KITENIN promotes tumor progression by enhancing angiogenesis in colorectal cancer.
We previously observed that KAI1 C-terminal interacting tetraspanin (KITENIN) is highly expressed in sporadic human colorectal cancer (CRC) tissues and hence the functional KITENIN complex acts to promote progression of CRC.
Previously, we identified KAI1 C-terminal interacting tetraspanin (KITENIN) as a metastasis-enhancing gene and found it to be highly expressed in sporadic colorectal cancer tissues.
We analyzed how EGF modulates the downstream signaling pathway of oncogenic KITENIN in colorectal cancer cells.
Biological alterations following EGF treatment were identified in KITENIN-overexpressed colorectal cancer cells with or without alteration of EGFR activity.
In addition, tumor tissues from metastatic patients with colorectal cancer who showed initial poor responses to cetuximab/chemotherapy expressed higher levels of KITENIN than did responders to therapy.
KITENIN (KAI1 C-terminal interacting tetraspanin) promotes invasion and metastasis in mouse colon cancer models.
In the present study, we evaluated the effects of KITENIN knockdown by intravenous administration of short hairpin RNAs (shRNAs) in an orthotopic mouse colon cancer model, simulating a primary or adjuvant treatment setting.
Our results suggest that shRNA targeting KITENIN has the potential to be an effective tool for the treatment of colon cancer in both adjuvant and metastatic setting.
KAI1 COOH-terminal interacting tetraspanin (KITENIN) has been found to act as a promoter of metastasis in murine models of colon cancer and squamous cell carcinoma (SCC).
The suppression of tumor progression and metastasis of established colon cancer in mice was observed after intravenous delivery of small interfering RNA (siRNA) targeting KITENIN.
The purposes of this study were to observe the effect of KITENIN on tumor cell behaviors of human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells and to evaluate its expression in human HCC tissues.
We found that two classes of ciliary disease genes were highly represented among the basal body proteome: cystic kidney disease (especially nephronophthisis) syndromes, including Meckel/Joubert-like and oral-facial-digital syndrome, caused by mutations in CEP290, MKS1, OFD1, and AHI1/Jouberin proteins and cone-rod dystrophy syndrome genes, including UNC-119/HRG4, NPHP4, and RPGR1.
Deregulated expression of AP-1 transcription factors is implicated in the pathogenesis of various lymphomas such as classical Hodgkin lymphomas, anaplastic large cell lymphomas, diffuse large B cell lymphomas and adult T cell leukemia/lymphoma.
We have shown previously that HTLV-1 basic leucine zipper (HBZ), a viral regulatory protein encoded by the human retrovirus, human T-cell leukemia virus, type 1 (HTLV-1) cooperates with JunD to enhance hTERT transcription in adult T-cell leukemia (ATL) cells.
Previously, we have shown that an AP-1 family member, FRA-2, is constitutively expressed in adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma (ATL) and, together with JUND, upregulates CCR4 and promotes ATL cell growth.
Delta9 -THCA increased mitochondrial mass in neuroblastoma N2a cells and prevented cytotoxicity induced by serum deprivation in STHdhQ111/Q111 cells and by mutHtt-q94 in N2a cells.
In this study, we performed a comprehensive, unbiased analysis of secretory pathways and identified an unconventional lysosomal pathway as an important mechanism for mHtt secretion in mouse neuroblastoma and striatal cell lines, as well as in primary neurons.
Using the flow cytometry method of pulse-shape analysis (PulSA) to sort neuroblastoma (Neuro2a) cells enriched with mutant or wild-type Htt into different aggregation states, we clarified which transcriptional signatures were specifically attributable to cells before versus after inclusion assembly.
We have previously shown that dopamine-induced oxidative stress triggers apoptotic cell death in dopaminergic neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells hyper-expressing the mutant polyQ Huntingtin (polyQ-Htt) protein.
Here we show that the hyper-expression of mutant (&gt;113/150) polyQ Htt is per se toxic to dopaminergic human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells, and that DA exacerbates this toxicity leading to apoptosis and secondary necrosis.
Lentiviral-mediated expression of Exp-Htt caused cell death and aggregate formation in human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y and rat primary striatal cultures.
We now report that adeno-associated virus (AAV)-mediated expression of CaM-peptide in differentiated neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells, stably expressing an N-terminal fragment of huntingtin containing 148 glutamine repeats, significantly decreases the amount of TG-modified huntingtin and attenuates cytotoxicity.
This meta-analysis demonstrates that within the Caucasian population, the NLRP1 rs12150220 polymorphism may correlate with a decreased risk of vitiligo-associated autoimmune diseases, especially autoimmune Addison's disease, type 1 diabetes, or systemic lupus erythematosus.
Gene variants known to contribute to Autoimmune Addison's disease (AAD) susceptibility include those at the MHC, MICA, CIITA, CTLA4, PTPN22, CYP27B1, NLRP-1 and CD274 loci.
NLRP1 is genetically associated with risk of several autoimmune diseases including generalized vitiligo, Addison disease, type 1 diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis, and others.
Investigating large patient cohorts from six different autoimmune diseases, that is autoimmune Addison's disease (n=333), type 1 diabetes (n=1086), multiple sclerosis (n=502), rheumatoid arthritis (n=945), systemic lupus erythematosus (n=156) and juvenile idiopathic arthritis (n=505), against 3273 healthy controls, we analyzed four single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in NALP1.
Many studies have suggested that SNPs in XRCC4 could be implicated in altering the risk of prostate cancer (PCa).
Our data suggest that the XRCC4 promoter -652G&gt;T polymorphism is functional and may influence genetic susceptibility to prostate cancer.
In this case-control study, several novel polymorphic variants of XRCC4, including C-1622T (rs7727691), G-1394T (rs6869366), C-571T (rs2075686) and intron3 DIP (rs28360071), were investigated, and the correlation of these variants to prostate cancer susceptibility in a Taiwanese population was observed.
The G-1394T variant of XRCC4 proved, after analysis of the frequencies of each variant in the prostate cancer and control groups, to be a significant single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in prostate carcinogenesis.
Our data clearly indicate that the heterogeneous G of G-1394T increases the risk of suceptibility to prostate cancer (P=0.0106), while no difference in distribution of XRCC4 C-1622T (rs7727691), C-571T (rs2075686) or intron3 DIP (rs28360071) between the prostate cancer and control groups was found.
To reveal the relationship between XRCC4 and bladder cancer, seven polymorphic variants of XRCC4, including C-1622T (rs7727691), G-1394T (rs6869366), G-652T (rs2075685), C-571T (rs2075686), intron3 DIP (rs28360071), S247A (rs3734091) and intron7 DIP (rs28360317) were investigated and analyzed for their association with bladder cancer susceptibility.
It was found that XRCC4 G-1394T is a significant SNP in bladder carcinogenesis after analyzing the frequencies of each variant in both bladder cancer and control groups.
These findings suggest that the G allele of XRCC4 G-1394T may be involved in bladder carcinogenesis and useful in early detection of bladder cancer.
FERM domain containing 7 (FRMD7) is a member of the four-point-one, ezrin, radixin, moesin (FERM) family of proteins, and has been reported to cause X-linked idiopathic congenital nystagmus (ICN), a disease which affects ocular motor control.
The CD40-CD40L pathway is a promising treatment target for autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus and lupus nephritis.
The inflammatory CD40-CD40L pathway is implicated in various autoimmune diseases, but the activity status of this pathway in various stages of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) progression is unknown.
In this study, we used gene signatures of CD40L stimulation derived from human immature dendritic cells and naive B cells to assess the expression of CD40-downstream genes in synovial tissues from anti-citrullinated protein Ab-positive arthralgia, undifferentiated arthritis (UA), early RA, and established RA cohorts in comparison with healthy donors.
This study explored the association between single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the CD40 gene, rs4810485 G &gt; T and rs1883832 C &gt; T, as well as disease susceptibility and severity in knee osteoarthritis (KOA) in the Chinese Han population.
The CD40 pathway is involved in the development and pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases, including rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
Significantly shorter postoperative overall survival was observed in HCC patients with high let-7c expression.The results suggest that aberrant expression of let-7a/7b/7c/7e occurs in benign liver diseases and HCC.
For this reason, the expression levels of 24 miRNA (let-7c, miR-92a-3p, 423-5p, 150-5p, 223-3p, 125b-5p, 342-3p, miR-206, 122-5p, 375, 223-5p, 10a-5p, 23b-5p, 99a-5p, 23a-5p, 10a-3p, 122-3p, 125b-1-3p, 23b-3p, 125b-2-3p, 23a-3p, 92a-1-5p, 92a-2-5p, 99a-3p) were analyzed in plasma of patients with chronic hepatitis B, HBV-positive cirrhosis and HBV-positive HCC and compared with control group samples.
There was no correlation between let-7c miRNA levels and other clinicopathological factors, such as patient age, sex, hepatitis B virus status, Alfa-fetoprotein  levels, tumour size, tumour number, the presence of cirrhosis, liver envelope invasion or portal vein thrombosis.
A set of 12 miRNAs (including miR-21, miR-221/222, miR-34a, miR-519a, miR-93, miR-96, and let-7c) was linked to disease progression from normal liver through cirrhosis to full-blown HCC.
So far, participation in the epileptogenesis and maintenance of epilepsy was proved for 5-HT1A, 5-HT2C, 5-HT3, 5-HT4 and 5-HT7 receptors as well as 5-HTT serotonin transporter.
The use of 5-HT4 receptor agonists may be an alternative strategy to achieve prokinesia during a migraine attack, although this issue still needs to be fully addressed by controlled studies.
Some of these drugs are also used therapeutically in the treatment of migraine (eg, sumatriptan, which is a 5-HT1 receptor agonist), vascular disorders (5-HT2 antagonists), and nausea and vomiting (5-HT3 antagonists, eg, dolasetron, granisetron, ondansetron, and tropisetron), and have been investigated in gastrointestinal motility disorders (5-HT4 antagonists) and behavioral psychopathologies (5-HT1 agonists and 5-HT2-4 antagonists).
However, the impact of TIGIT on melanoma-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes in the effector phase remains unclear.
In this study, we demonstrated that melanoma cells control antimelanoma cytotoxic T lymphocyte responses via the TIGIT-CD155 interaction in the effector phase.
We then demonstrated that CD155 on melanoma cells suppressed cytokine release from melanoma-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes via interaction with TIGIT.
This suggested that antimelanoma cytotoxic T lymphocyte responses are controlled not only by an imbalance in CD226 (an activating molecule that binds to CD155) and TIGIT expression on T cells but also by the expression levels of CD155 on melanoma cells.
In addition, the co-blockade of TIGIT and PD-1 signals synergistically elicited a response of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes on autologous melanoma cells.
These results suggest that the CD155-TIGIT interaction should be blocked for enhancement of antimelanoma immune responses.
describe a novel immunosuppressive mechanism in melanoma that is triggered by the interaction between CD155 (expressed by melanomas) and T-cell Ig and ITIM domain (TIGIT) (expressed by tumor infiltrating lymphocytes).
However, the impact of TIGIT on melanoma specific CTLs in the effector phase remains still unclear.
In this study, we demonstrated that melanoma cells control anti-melanoma CTL responses via the TIGIT-CD155 interaction in the effector phase.
We then demonstrated that CD155 on melanoma cells suppressed cytokine release from melanoma-specific CTLs via interaction with TIGIT.
This suggested that anti-melanoma CTL responses are controlled not only by an imbalance in CD226 (an activating molecule binds to CD155) and TIGIT expression on T cells but also by the expression levels of CD155 on melanoma cells.
In addition, co-blockade of TIGIT and PD-1 signals synergistically elicited a response of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) on autologous melanoma cells.
These results suggest that the CD155-TIGIT interaction should be blocked for enhancement of anti-melanoma immune responses.Journal of Investigative Dermatology accepted article preview online, 12 October 2015. doi:10.1038/jid.2015.404.
Here, we determined that TIGIT is upregulated on tumor antigen-specific (TA-specific) CD8+ T cells and CD8+ tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) from patients with melanoma, and these TIGIT-expressing CD8+ T cells often coexpress the inhibitory receptor PD-1.
Moreover, CD8+ TILs from patients exhibited downregulation of the costimulatory molecule CD226, which competes with TIGIT for the same ligand, supporting a TIGIT/CD226 imbalance in metastatic melanoma.
Collectively, our results show that TIGIT and PD-1 regulate the expansion and function of TA-specific CD8+ T cells and CD8+ TILs in melanoma patients and suggest that dual TIGIT and PD-1 blockade should be further explored to elicit potent antitumor CD8+ T cell responses in patients with advanced melanoma.
Four patients with clinically and genetically confirmed Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) underwent nocturnal polysomnograpy (PSG), multiple sleep latency test (MSLT), human leukocyte antigens (HLA) typing and estimation of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) hypocretin-1 (Hcrt-1) level to investigate if a role of hypothalamic dysfunction and sleep disturbance might be functionally connected through the hypocretin (orexin) system.
The deficiency of CSF Hcrt-1 level correlated in PWS patients with their EDS severity.
A four-generation kindred (14 affected and 10 unaffected members) from Missouri, U.S.A. in which spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia (SEMD) had been inherited as an autosomal dominant disorder was investigated for linkage to 13 candidate loci: COL2AI, COL9AI, COL9A2, COL9A3, COL10A1, COL11A1, COL11A2, PSACH, FGFR3, decorin, CRTL1, COMP, and PTHRP.
Linkage to 2 cartilage-specific candidate genes, type II collagen (COL2A1) and proteoglycan link protein genes (CRTL1), was tested in 9 autosomal dominant families with pseudoachondroplasia.
In the last years, mutations in four genes (NFU1, BOLA3, ISCA2 and IBA57) have been related to a new group of multiple mitochondrial dysfunction syndromes characterized by lactic acidosis, hyperglycinemia, multiple defects of the respiratory chain complexes, and impairment of four lipoic acid-dependent enzymes: Alfa-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase complex, pyruvic dehydrogenase, branched-chain Alfa-keto acid dehydrogenase complex and the H protein of the glycine cleavage system.
Variation in the reports suggesting both functional dependency and independency of TLR-2 on its heterodimeric partner TLR-6 in response to ligands exists, thus this study was postulated to observe the expression pattern of TLR-6 in synovial tissue and lymphoid organs after inducing septic arthritis by S. aureus in Swiss albino mouse model and the instigated cytokine profile could affirm its plausible role in SA.
Our findings suggest the pro-inflammatory and catabolic role of TLR-2 mediated by the NF-KB pathway in septic arthritis.
Finally, in primary breast tumors, PR-A expression was correlated negatively with miR-92a-3p expression and positively with miR-26b-5p expression.
Thus, upregulation of hsa-miR-26b-5p and downregulation of TRPS1 in radiation-associated breast cancer tissue samples suggests these molecules representing radiation markers in breast cancer.
The aim of this study was to identify miRNAs that regulate PR in breast cancer.We mapped potential miRNA binding sites for miR-181a, miR-23a and miR-26b on PR mRNA and demonstrated a direct regulation of PR by these three miRNAs by in-vitro Luciferase binding assays.
A significant reciprocal correlation between PR mRNA and the miRNA levels were identified suggesting a role for miR-181a, miR-23a and miR-26b in PR regulation in breast cancer.
Furthermore, miR-181a and miR-26b were found to be over-expressed in most tumor tissues supporting their role in ER-positive breast cancer development.
We conclude that miR-181a, miR-23a and miR-26b act as negative regulators of PR expression in ER-positive breast cancer.
MicroRNA-26b (miR-26b) has been reported to be down-regulated in a wide range of malignant tumors, However, the mechanism by which miR-26b is implicated in breast cancer tumorigenesis is incompletely understood.
This study was undertaken to evaluate the expression pattern of miR-26b and characterize its biological role in human breast cancer.
Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was used to quantify the expression levels of miR-26b in breast cancer and adjacent non-cancerous breast tissues.
Here, we found that miR-26b expression was relatively downregulated in breast cancer specimens (P&lt;0.01).
These findings suggest that miR-26b exerts a tumor suppressive role in breast cancer and the miR-26b-mediated growth inhibition is achieved through suppression of a new target gene CDK8.
The expression of miR-26a or miR-26b was modulated in ER+ breast cancer cells (MCF-7 and T47D) and tumor cell growth in vitro and an in vivo xenograft model was determined.
Estrogen reduced the expression of miR-26a and miR-26b in ER+ breast cancer cells.
Forced expression of miR-26a or miR-26b significantly inhibited the estrogen stimulated growth of ER+ breast cancer cells and tumor growth in xenograft models, whereas miR-26a/b depletion increased the growth of ER+ breast cancer cells in the absence of estrogen treatment.
The expression of microRNAs (miRs) that regulate (miR-29a, miR-29b, miR-29c, miR-148a and miR-148b) or are predicted to regulate DNMT3b (miR-26a, miR-26b, miR-203 and miR-222) were evaluated among 70 primary breast cancers (36 luminal A-like, 13 luminal B-like, 5 HER2-enriched, 16 basal-like) and 18 normal mammoplasty tissues.
We report microRNAs that are differentially expressed between breast normal fibroblasts and CAFs of oestrogen receptor-positive cancers, and explore the influences of one of these, miR-26b, on breast cancer biology.
Using qPCR, miR-26b was confirmed as down-regulated in fibroblasts from 15 of 18 further breast cancers.
Furthermore, in co-culture with MCF7 breast cancer epithelial cells, fibroblasts with reduced miR-26b expression enhanced both MCF7 migration in trans-well assays and MCF7 invasion from three-dimensional spheroids by up to five-fold.
In addition, three novel miR-26b targets were identified (TNKS1BP1, CPSF7, COL12A1) and the expression of each in cancer stroma was shown to be significantly associated with breast cancer recurrence.
Compared with 55 (33.3%) individuals in whom OSAS was not confirmed, OSAS patients had prolonged CLT (+12.8%), associated with higher PAI-1 antigen (+18.1%) (after adjustment for age, diabetes, and body mass index; both P &lt; 0.01) and similar levels of TAFIa, plasmin, or antiplasmin.
These factors include genetic polymorphisms in plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 and thrombin-activatable fibrinolysis inhibitor, diabetes mellitus, metabolic syndrome, hyperglycemia, obesity, depression, binge alcohol consumption, anti-Parkinsonian medications, oral hormone therapy, pregnancy, and cancer.
An important inhibitor of fibrinolysis, thrombin-activatable fibrinolysis inhibitor (TAFI), participates in hypofibrinolysis in diabetes mellitus and may be involved in diabetic macrovascular disease.
The present study was designed to determine whether TAFI polymorphisms (505G/A and 1040C/T) and TAFI levels are correlated with the development of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) and macrovascular diseases (MVDs).
This study was designed to investigate the association between TAFI levels in relation to metabolic control, microvascular complications and lipid profile in a cohort of Egyptian children and adolescents with type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM).
This suggests the possibility of TAFI participating in the mechanism of hypofibrinolysis, hence occurrence of microvascular complications in diabetes.
We aimed to investigate TAFI in type 2 diabetes mellitus patients with MetS.
In this study we aimed to assess the circulating levels of TAFI antigen, 'a fibrinolytic parameter' in women with gestational diabetes (GDM).
We studied the clinical effects of percutaneous radiofrequency ablation (RFCA) combined with trans-catheter arterial chemoembolization (TACE) in the treatment of breast cancer with liver metastasis.
Therefore, RFCA combined with TACE in the treatment of breast cancer with liver metastasis is safe and effective.
There is limited data on the impact of transarterial chemoembolisation (TACE) on survival in patients of breast cancer with liver metastasis (BCLM).
The identification of specific effects of these endocrine disruptors on ADAM10 and ADAM17 will help to provide a better understanding of their roles in cell signaling and proinflammatory processes, and provide new potential targets for treatment of reproductive or inflammatory diseases such as asthma or breast cancer that are promoted by xenoestrogens.
ADAM10 and ADAM17 have been shown to contribute to the acquired drug resistance of HER2-positive breast cancer in response to trastuzumab.
The ADAM (adisintegrin and metalloproteinase) proteases are involved in ectodomain cleavage of transmembrane proteins, and ADAM17 is known to cleave Nectin-4 in breast cancer.
Here we report for the first time that DATS inhibits the expression of ADAM10 and ADAM17 in estrogen-independent MDA-MB-231 and estrogen-dependent MCF-7 breast cancer cells, and in Harvey-ras (H-Ras) transformed MCF10A-H-Ras breast epithelial cells.
As described here, we demonstrate that the cell surface protease a disintegrin and metalloproteinase 17 (ADAM17) is expressed by macrophages in mammary tumors and contributes to regulating the expression of pro-inflammatory mediators, including inflammatory cytokines and the inflammatory mediator cyclooxygenase-2 (Cox-2).
Furthermore, we demonstrate that ADAM17 is expressed on leukocytes, including macrophages, within polyoma middle T (PyMT)-derived mammary tumors.
Genetic deletion of ADAM17 in leukocytes resulted in decreased onset of mammary tumor growth, which was associated with reduced expression of the Cox-2 within the tumor.
These findings demonstrate that ADAM17 regulates key inflammatory mediators in macrophages and that leukocyte-specific ADAM17 is an important promoter of mammary tumor initiation.
Substantial evidence has demonstrated that an obvious increased in ADAM17 cell surface expression has been discovered in breast cancer and was shown to be associated with mammary tumorigenesis, invasiveness, and drug resistance.
Over the last decades, it has received more than its share of attention that ADAM17 plays a potential role in breast cancer, including cell proliferation, invasion, angiogenesis, apoptosis, and trastuzumab resistance.
In our review, we discuss the mechanisms through which ADAM17 acts on breast cancer tumorigenesis and progression.
Thus, this will provide further impetus for exploiting ADAM17 as a new target for breast cancer treatment.
We investigated the ability of Abs blocking Tim-1 or Tim-3 ligand-binding activity to prevent and treat murine experimental allergic conjunctivitis (EC), a Th2-mediated disease.
Thus, treatment with anti-Tim-1 or anti-Tim-3 Ab can suppress both the induction and progression of EC, which could indicate potential preventive and/or therapeutic approaches for allergic diseases such as allergic conjunctivitis.
In sum, the crucial role of MEK2 in MDA-MB-231 cell viability and the unknown relationship between MEK2 and MKK3/MKK6-p38 axis here revealed may open new therapeutic strategies for aggressive breast cancer.
Mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 3 (MKK3), has been reported as a novel tumor suppressor in breast cancer.
Here, we show that the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) MKK3 suppresses the growth of breast cancer, in which it varies in copy number.
A pervasive loss of MKK3 gene copy number in patients with breast cancer is associated with an impairment of MKK3 expression and protein level in malignant tissues.
To assess the functional role of MKK3 in breast cancer, we showed in an animal model that MKK3 activity is required for suppression of tumor growth.
This study aimed to elucidate the expression of MerTK and AxlTK on glomeruli and analyze their clinical significance in lupus nephritis (LN) patients.
To investigate the distinct functions of Axl and Mer in lupus nephritis, we compared the severity of nephrotoxic serum glomerulonephritis in wild-type (WT), Axl-knockout (KO), Mer-KO, and Axl/Mer-KO mice.
Whereas AXL, ferritin, and sTNFRII were significantly elevated in patients with active lupus nephritis (LN) relative to SLE patients who were quiescent, other molecules such as OPN, sTNFRI, sTNFRII, IGFBP2, SIGLEC5, FAS, and MMP10 exhibited the capacity to distinguish SLE from healthy controls with ROC AUC exceeding 90%, all with p &lt; 0.001 significance.
The specificity of Axl and IGFBP-2 for concurrent active lupus nephritis was higher than anti-dsDNA or C3.
The performance of Axl and IGFBP-2 in lupus nephritis should be further explored in a longitudinal cohort of SLE patients.
Dysfunction of the microRNA (miRNA)-processing enzyme DICER1 and Alu RNA accumulation are linked to the pathogenesis of age-related macular degeneration (AMD).
DICER1 was recently shown to have another function of silencing the toxicity of Alu RNAs in retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) cells, which are involved in the pathogenesis of age related macular degeneration.
Regarding medulloepithelioma, we have learned of the common associated features of neovascular glaucoma, retrolenticular neoplastic or vascular cyclitic membrane, intralesional cysts, response to radiotherapy, and association with Dicer-1 mutation.
Loss of FlnA and Fmn2 impairs proliferation, thereby generating multiple embryonic phenotypes, including microcephaly.
Human disorders involving the actin-binding Filamin A (FLNA) and vesicle trafficking Brefeldin-associated guanine exchange factor 2 (BIG2 is encoded by the ARFGEF2 gene) proteins are implicated in these various developmental processes, resulting in a malformation of cortical development called periventricular heterotopia (nodules along the ventricular lining) and microcephaly (small brain).
The presence of periventricular heterotopia, acquired microcephaly and suspected recessive inheritance led to mutation analysis of ARFGEF2 in two affected siblings and their healthy consanguineous parents, after mutations in FLNA had been ruled out.
Mutations in FLNA (Xq28) and ARFGEF2 (20q13) are responsible for X-linked bilateral PH and a rare autosomal recessive form of PH with microcephaly.
Within an analysis cohort of 532 samples, the following were classified correctly: 89 of 89 trisomy 21 cases (sensitivity 100%, 95% [confidence interval] CI 95.9-100), 35 of 36 trisomy 18 cases (sensitivity 97.2%, 95% CI 85.5-99.9), 11 of 14 trisomy 13 cases (sensitivity 78.6%, 95% CI 49.2-95.3), [corrected] 232 of 233 females (sensitivity 99.6%, 95% CI 97.6 to more than 99.9), 184 of 184 males (sensitivity 100%, 95% CI 98.0-100), and 15 of 16 monosomy X cases (sensitivity 93.8%, 95% CI 69.8-99.8).
Because HuMIF is reported to be elevated in prostate cancer and inflammation plays an important role in the initiation and progression of cancers, we have explored a role for TvMIF in prostate cancer.
TvMIF increases the in vitro growth and invasion through Matrigel of benign and prostate cancer cells.
Together, these data indicate that chronic T. vaginalis infections may result in TvMIF-driven inflammation and cell proliferation, thus triggering pathways that contribute to the promotion and progression of prostate cancer.
Circulating MIF levels are elevated in several types of human cancer including prostate cancer.
Recently described fully human anti-MIF antibodies were tested in vitro and in vivo for their ability to influence growth rate and invasion of the human PC3 prostate cancer cell line.
in Endocrine-Related Cancer demonstrates a link between macrophage migration inhibitory factor and neuroendocrine differentiation in prostate cancer.
Macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) is a protein that is overexpressed in many tumors, such as colon and prostate cancer, melanoma, and glioblastoma multiforme (GBM).
Consistent with HBP1-mediated repression of MIF, low levels of HBP1 expression were associated with high levels of MIF expression in prostate cancer samples.
Our study showed that miR-548d-3p/TP53BP2 pathway is critically involved in the proliferation and apoptosis of breast cancer cells and may be new therapeutic target of breast cancer cells.
Reduced ASPP2 expression results in EMT, and is associated with poor survival in hepatocellular carcinoma and breast cancer patients.
Clinical and experimental data indicate roles for cytokines IL-13, TNFAlfa, circulating cardiotrophin-like cytokine factor 1 (member of the IL-6 family), circulating hemopexin, radical oxygen species, and the soluble urokinase-type plasminogen activator receptor (suPAR) in the development of nephrotic syndrome.
Other potential permeability factors include hemopexin and vascular permeability factor in minimal change nephrotic syndrome (MCNS) and soluble urokinase receptor in FSGS.
When infused into rats, hemopexin induces reversible proteinuria, and activated hemopexin is increased in children with minimal change nephrotic syndrome.
Since an active isoform of plasma hemopexin (Hx) has been proposed to be a potential effector molecule in minimal change disease (MCD), we tested plasma and urine samples from subjects with MCD in relapse (n = 18) or in remission (n = 23) (after treatment with prednisolone) for presence or activity of Hx.
Previous studies into the relevance of a putative circulating factor in the pathogenesis of minimal change nephrotic syndrome have opened the possibility that plasma hemopexin might be an important effector molecule in this disorder.
It is concluded that the hemopexin molecule as such can potentially act as a toxic protease, leading in the rat to proteinuria and glomerular alterations characteristic for minimal change nephrotic syndrome.
Since this ecto-enzyme appears to be able to regulate plasma hemopexin, which latter molecule plays a role in the pathogenesis of corticosteroid responsive nephrotic syndrome, the question was raised whether glucocorticoids are potentially able to downregulate ecto-apyrase activity of these cells.
The aims of the present study were to determine whether the changes in density and location of CD68-positive and CD206-positive macrophages contribute to progression of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and to evaluate prognostic values of these cells in post-surgical patients.
Fibrolamellar carcinoma is a unique type of hepatocellular carcinoma with a distinctive predilection for young patients without underlying liver disease, characteristic large neoplastic cells with intervening, dense fibrosis, co-expression of keratin 7 and CD68 and activation of protein kinase A (most often by formation of DNAJB1-PRKACA).
Moreover, the accumulation of CD169(+) macrophages in tumour tissues was negatively associated with disease progression and predicted favourable survival in hepatocellular carcinoma patients, which was in contrast to the trend observed for total CD68(+) macrophages.
To gain insight into the biochemical basis of Sotos syndrome, we tested the ability of each NSD1 PHD domain to bind histone H3 when methylated at regulatory sites Lys4, Lys9, Lys27, Lys36, and Lys79, and histone H4 at regulatory Lys20, and determined whether Sotos point mutations disrupted methylation site-specific binding.
This study identified various genes like FN1 which is central in our analysis, NEUROD6, RELN, TGFBetaR2, NLRP1, SCRT1, CSNK2B, SCN1B, CABP1, KIF5A and antisense RNAs like AQP4-AS1 and KIRREL3-AS2 providing important insight into the understanding of the pathophysiology or genomic basis of drug refractory epilepsy due to MTS.
Additionally, C1QB, C1S, CFI, SCN3B and FN1 may be potential therapeutic targets for epilepsy.
Our previous studies showed the diagnostic potential of miR-451 as a serological marker for inflammatory breast cancer (IBC), miR-337- 5p and miR-30b for non-inflammatory breast cancer (non-IBC).
Mechanistically, we demonstrated that the nucleotide T deletion created an illegitimate binding NPM1 for miR-337-5p, which was widely expressed in different acute myeloid leukemia subtypes and inhibited NPM1 expression.
Recent findings suggesting that Abelson helper integration site 1 (AHI1) is involved in non-syndromic retinal disease have been debated, as the functional significance of identified missense variants was uncertain.
We assessed whether AHI1 variants cause non-syndromic retinitis pigmentosa (RP).
An electroretinogram showed mixed retinal dystrophy and an AHI1 homozygous missense c.1981T&gt;C mutation was identified (parents are carriers).
Three cases are reported, including the identification of AHI1 as a novel candidate gene for nonsyndromic retinitis pigmentosa.
Mutations in AHI1 are the most common genetic cause of JSRD, with developmental hindbrain anomalies and retinal degeneration being prominent features.
Moreover, AHI1 screening in five other patients with CEP290-related disease and neurological involvement revealed a second novel missense variant, p.His758Pro, in one LCA patient with mild mental retardation and autism.
The retinal degeneration observed in Ahi1(-/-) mice recapitulates aspects of the retinal phenotype observed in patients with JBTS and suggests the importance of Ahi1 in photoreceptor function.
It was discovered that enhanced HSPC111 expression paralleled the upregulation of c-Myc and was directly regulated by c-Myc in breast cancer cells.
Finally, overall survival analysis revealed that concomitant upregulation of HSPC111 and RTCD1 correlated with the worst prognosis in a breast cancer cohort.
Inhibition of HSPC111-dependent ribosomal biosynthesis and protein synthesis is a promising therapeutic strategy to diminish breast cancer tumor progression.
Importantly, high expression of NOP16 was associated with poor clinical outcome in breast cancer patients.
In summary, the regulation of expression and localization of NOP16 varies in tumor environments with high versus low MYC levels and demonstrate the importance of stratifying clinical breast cancers based on MYC levels.
HSPC111 mRNA and protein were over-expressed in breast cancer cell lines and primary breast carcinomas, and this was positively correlated with MYC mRNA levels.
These data identify HSPC111 as an estrogen and c-Myc target gene that is over-expressed in breast cancer and is associated with an adverse patient outcome.
Thus formation of Smad3/Smad4/CDK9 complex drives renal fibrosis during ureteral obstruction.
We found that mice with specific deletion of Smad4 in Tbx18-expressing ureteral mesenchyme exhibited hydroureter and hydronephrosis at embryonic day (E) 16.5, and the mutant mesenchymal cells failed to differentiate into SMCs with increased apoptosis and decreased proliferation.
Here we studied the roles of Smad4 to regulate TGF-Beta signaling in a mouse model of unilateral ureteral obstruction using conditional Smad4 knockout mice and in isolated Smad4 mutant macrophages and fibroblasts.
Ovarian juvenile granulosa cell tumor has an interesting association with multiple enchondromatosis (Ollier disease and Maffucci syndrome) and should be considered a leading diagnosis when an ovarian mass is found in young patients with these conditions.
It is important to recognize that when the female patient presents with enchondromatosis and a large unilateral multilocular-solid ovarian mass, the specific diagnosis of granulosa cell tumor can be made with high accuracy.
A 15-year-old girl developed a juvenile granulosa cell tumor associated with Maffucci's syndrome (enchondromatosis + hemangiomas).
A review of the literature showed 10 previous cases of juvenile granulosa cell tumor associated with enchondromatosis, two associated with Maffucci's syndrome, and the rest with Ollier's disease (enchondromatosis).
Ovarian juvenile granulosa cell tumor may occur not infrequently in female patients with enchondromatosis in the first or second decades, in contrast to the widely recognized sarcomatous changes of enchondromas that usually occur after the second decade.
Immunohistological staining was performed for S100A2, S100A4, S100A6, S100A7, and MMP9 in 101 cases of various types of epidermal tumors, viz., squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), Bowen's disease (BD), actinic keratosis (AK), basal cell carcinoma (BCC), keratoacanthoma (KA), and seborrheic keratosis (SK).
Varying types of skin appendage tumors and most peripheral cells in tumor nests of basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma showed positive S100A2 immunoreactivity in neoplastic cells.
Varying types of skin appendage tumours and most peripheral cells in tumour nests of basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma showed positive S100A2 immunoreactivity in neoplastic cells corresponding to basal cells but were nonreactive or faintly reactive for other S100 proteins.
Paraffin-embedded tissue of normal skin adjacent to 26 naevi, 39 primary cutaneous melanomas and 14 cutaneous melanoma metastases was incubated with polyclonal antibodies against the recombinant human S100 proteins (S100A1, S100A2, S100A3, S100A4, S100A6, S100B) using the alkaline phosphatase anti-alkaline phosphatase method.
Four of 39 primary cutaneous melanomas were positive for S100A2, whereas none of the metastases or naevi showed any immunoreactivity.
The purpose of this study was to examine the expression of 4 newly available polyclonal antibodies against the human recombinant Ca(2+)-binding S100 proteins, S100A1, S100A2, S100A4 and S100A6, in cutaneous melanoma and to correlate these findings with the standard S100 staining as well as with the metastatic potential of the primary.
To investigate the pattern and regulatory properties of biglycan expression in human adipose tissues in the context of obesity and its related diseases, we recruited 21 non-diabetic obese women, 11 type 2 diabetic obese women, and 59 normal-weight women.
Biglycan, a small leucine rich proteoglycan ECM protein, is up-regulated in obesity and has recently been recognized as a pro-inflammatory molecule.
In the present study, we characterized biglycan expression in various adipose depots in wild-type mice fed a low fat diet (LFD) or obesity-inducing high fat diet (HFD).
Collectively, our data suggest that the small leucine-rich proteoglycan family proteins biglycan and decorin may play a role in the development of obesity and T2D, possibly by facilitating expansion of adipose tissue mass.
Therefore, we determined the effect of chronic inflammation induced by obesity and acute inflammation by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) challenge on ECM genes including biglycan (BGN), collagen 1A1 (COL1A1) and COL6A1, major ECM genes in adipose tissue.
Considerable efforts have been made to characterize RGS4 as a potential candidate gene for schizophrenia.
While these lines of investigations have yielded partially inconsistent findings, they provide a perspective on RGS4 as an important part of a larger biological system contributing to schizophrenia risk.
This gene-based review aims to provide a comprehensive overview of published data from different experimental modalities and discusses the current knowledge of RGS4's systems-biological impact on the schizophrenia pathology.
The Regulator of G protein signaling 4 (RGS4) gene is a candidate susceptibility gene for schizophrenia (SCZ).
We genotyped SNP1 (rs10917670), rs2661347, SNP4 (rs951436), SNP7 (rs951439), SNP18 (rs2661319), and rs10799897 (SNP9897) and tested the methylation status of CpG islands of the RGS4 gene in the postmortem DLPFC samples obtained from subjects with SCZ and bipolar disorder as well as healthy controls.
The aim of the present study was to investigate the association between the variation in the regulator of G-protein signaling 4 (RGS4) gene, a putative candidate gene for psychosis previously associated with schizophrenia endophenotypes, and psychotic-like experiences (PLEs).
Thus, lower levels of RGS4 would enhance GPCR-mediated reductions in NMDAR activity and could contribute to NMDAR hypofunction in schizophrenia.
In this study, we quantified RGS4 mRNA and protein levels at several levels of resolution in the DLPFC from subjects with schizophrenia and matched healthy comparison subjects.
RGS4 mRNA and protein levels were significantly lower in schizophrenia subjects and were positively correlated across all subjects.
The RGS4 mRNA deficit was present in pyramidal neurons of DLPFC layers 3 and 5 of the schizophrenia subjects.
In contrast, levels of miR16 were significantly higher in the DLPFC of schizophrenia subjects, and higher miR16 levels predicted lower RGS4 mRNA levels.
These findings provide convergent evidence of lower RGS4 mRNA and protein levels in schizophrenia that may result from increased expression of miR16.
Given the role of RGS4 in regulating GPCRs, and consequently the strength of NMDAR signaling, these findings could contribute to the molecular substrate for NMDAR hypofunction in DLPFC pyramidal cells in schizophrenia.
Olanzapine coadministered with PCP normalized 34% of the 146 PCP-induced probe set expression changes, and a network of 17 olanzapine-normalized genes was identified enriched in schizophrenia candidate genes containing RGS4, SYN1 and AKT as nodes.
In the present study we investigated the possible association of polymorphisms from five candidate genes RGS4, SLC6A3, PIP4K2A, BDNF, PI4KA with response to antipsychotic in variably ill schizophrenia patients.
Using data from the Osteoarthritis Initiative, we quantified daily walking as average steps/day from an accelerometer (Actigraph GTM1) worn for &gt;10 hours/day over one week.
We aimed to quantify CNVs in glutathione S-transferase M1 (GSTM1) gene and determine its genetic contribution in Tunisian rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and its subsets through an innovative technique for quantification.
This study aimed to determine whether Glutathione S-transferase M1 (GSTM1), P1 (GSTT1), NFKB1 polymorphisms confer susceptibility to systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).
Previous studies have suggested that the null polymorphism of the glutathione S-transferases M1/T1 (GSTM1/T1) gene may be associated with the risk of developing systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).
More recently, IGFBP-6 was found to promote the migration of rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) cells in an IGF-independent manner, and MAPK pathways were involved in this process.
Although RD rhabdomyosarcoma cells express IGF-II, we previously showed that mIGFBP-6 promoted migration through an IGF-independent, p38-dependent pathway.
We further studied the role of MAP kinases in IGFBP-6-induced migration of Rh30 rhabdomyosarcoma cells, which also express IGF-II.
These results indicate that IGFBP-6 promotes Rh30 rhabdomyosarcoma chemotaxis in an IGF-independent manner, and that MAPK signaling pathways and their cross-talk play an important role in this process.
We report here that both exogenous and endogenous IGFBP-6 could be imported into the nuclei of rhabdomyosarcoma and HEK-293 cells.
Wild-type and mutant IGFBP-6, as well as IGF-II, induced cell migration in RD rhabdomyosarcoma and LIM 1215 colon cancer cells.
IGFBP-6 inhibits growth of a number of IGF-II-dependent cancers, including rhabdomyosarcoma, neuroblastoma and colon cancer.
Treatment of Rh30 rhabdomyosarcoma cells with insulin-like growth factor binding protein-6 (IGFBP-6; 1000 ng/ml), which binds insulin-like growth factor-II with high affinity, inhibited growth in vitro (p &lt; 0.001).
CCI-779 thus acts additively with IGFBP-6 to reduce rhabdomyosarcoma growth both in vitro and in vivo.
Rhabdomyosarcoma cell lines overexpress insulin-like growth factor-II (IGF-II), an autocrine growth factor that is inhibited by insulin-like growth factor binding protein-6 (IGFBP-6).
IGFBP-6 is associated with myoblast quiescence, and expression in rhabdomyosarcoma cells is low.
The effect of IGFBP-6 on 2 rhabdomyosarcoma cell lines, RD and Rh30, was studied.
IGFBP-6 therefore inhibits proliferation and promotes apoptosis of rhabdomyosarcoma in vitro and dramatically inhibits xenograft growth in vivo, at least in part by inhibiting IGF-II.
Low expression of IGFBP-6 may therefore contribute to rhabdomyosarcoma growth and metastasis.
These loci, chosen for their location on HSA 1, are antithrombin 3 (AT3), renin (REN), complement component receptor 2 (CR2), phosphofructokinase muscle type (PFKM), Gardner-Rasheed feline sarcoma viral (v-fgr) oncogene homolog (FGR), alpha fucosidase (FUCA1), G-protein beta 1 subunit (GNB1), alpha 1A amylase, (AMY1), the neuroblastoma RAS viral (v-ras) oncogene homolog (NRAS), and alpha skeletal actin (ACTA1).
Using multiplex bead array and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, CXCL1, CXCL8, CXCL10, CXCL13, CCL20, CCL22, neurofilament light chain (NFL), neurofilament heavy chain, glial fibrillary acidic protein, chitinase-3-like-1, matrix metalloproteinase-9 and osteopontin were analysed in CSF from 41 patients with CIS or relapsing-remitting MS and 22 healthy controls.
Increased levels of CCL22, CXCL10 and sCD40L characterized relapsing-remitting MS patients with the presence of gadolinium-enhancing lesions; decreased CCL2 and increased CXCL1 and CCL5 were typical of relapsing-remitting MS patients irrespectively of the presence of gadolinium-enhancing lesions.
The CCL22 levels were also significantly higher in women with RRMS and PRMS patterns in comparison to healthy women (P &lt; 0.05 and P &lt; 0.01, respectively).
To study the prevalence of Hashimoto thyroiditis (HT), anti-thyroid autoantibodies (anti-thyroglobulin or TgAb and thyroperoxidase or TPOAb) in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) patients.
The present study indicated that APH1B, JAM3, FBLN2, CSAD and PSTPIP2 may have important roles in the progression of atherosclerosis in females and may be potential biomarkers for early diagnosis and prognosis as well as treatment targets for this disease.
APH1A and APH1B, a subunit of the Gamma-secretase complex, also modulated ABeta42/ABeta40 ratio without any alterations in Epsilon-cleavage, a result in contrast to what has been observed with PS1 and APP FAD mutations.
Parkinson's disease (n = 86) and control (n = 161) DNA were genotyped for 19 regulatory region tagging single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within nine genes (APP, ADAM10, BACE1, BACE2, PSEN1, PSEN2, PEN2, NCSTN, and APH1B) involved in the cleavage of APP.
Neuregulin 1 (NRG1) and the Gamma-secretase subunit APH1B have been previously implicated as genetic risk factors for schizophrenia and schizophrenia relevant deficits have been observed in rodent models with loss of function mutations in either gene.
In conclusion, our study sheds light on the physiological role of Aph1b-Gamma-secretase in brain and provides a new mechanistic perspective on the relevance of NRG1 processing in schizophrenia.
Here, we for the first time determined mRNA expression levels of presenilin-1, presenilin-2, Aph1a, Aph1b, PEN-2, and nicastrin in a set of breast cancer tissue samples (N = 55) by quantitative real-time PCR in order to clarify the clinical significance of the expression of different Gamma-secretase complex components in breast cancer.
Results suggest that distinct neuropeptides are able to reduce the number of lymphocytes at inflammatory sites during existing eosinophilia by inhibiting eosinophil IL-16 release, thus attenuating the pro-inflammatory action of lymphocytes and monocytes.
Although release of sensory neuropeptides is involved in most conditions of airway hyperresponsiveness, increased bronchial resistance, and lung eosinophilia, the role of these nervous system-derived mediators in pulmonary diseases may be underestimated.
In this study, the role of neuropeptides in the IL-5-induced airway hyperresponsiveness and eosinophilia in the guinea pig was examined using selective neurokinin receptor antagonists.
To determine if PPEF-2 alone or in combination with PPEF-1 plays a role in rhodopsin dephosphorylation and to determine if retinal degeneration accompanies mutation of PPEF-1 and/or PPEF-2, we have produced mice carrying targeted disruptions in the PPEF-1 and PPEF-2 genes.
These data indicate that, in contrast to loss of rdgC function in Drosophila, elimination of PPEF function does not cause retinal degeneration in vertebrates.
Unexpectedly this large deletion abolishes exons of three adjacent genes: serine-threonine phosphatase gene (PPEF-1)/serine-threonine protein phosphatase gene (PP7), retinoschisis gene (RS1), and serine-threonine kinase gene (STK9).
Despite these two unique deletions, which either lead to severely defective transcription or total absence of the retinoschisin and PPEF-1 protein, all the patients have a typical retinoschisis phenotype.
This region of PP7 is similar to the Drosophila retinal degeneration C gene product (rdgC), and PP7 and rdgC share 42.1% identity.
Ataxia-telangiectasia mutated kinase (ATM) is a serine/threonine kinase.
Mutations in the ATM gene cause a rare autosomal multisystemic disease known as Ataxia-telangiectasia (AT).
This review summarizes the role of ATM in the heart, specifically in cardiac remodeling following Beta-adrenergic receptor stimulation and myocardial infarction.
Identification of the gene defective in this syndrome, ataxia-telangiectasia mutated gene (ATM), and further characterization of the disorder together with a greater insight into the function of the ATM protein have expanded our knowledge about the molecular pathogenesis of this disease.
PcG-related target genes involved in DNA damage were identified, including p53, Ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) and Forkhead box O3 (FOXO3).
Ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene mutations may confer increased sensitivity to ionizing radiation and increased risk of late toxicity for cancer patients.
Mutations in the ataxia telangiectasia mutated gene seem to play an important role in normal cell function and in cardiovascular remodeling.
The ataxia-telangiectasia mutated proteins (ATM) pathway is considered an important factor in the DNA damage response of tumor formation, but its function in the development of PAH remains unknown.
Recent evidence indicates that ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) is a cytoplasmic protein that involves in insulin signaling pathways.
Ataxia telangiectasia (AT) is a progressive multisystem autosomal recessive disorder caused by mutations in the AT-mutated (ATM) gene.
Senescence-related genes (ie, p21, p53, and ataxia telangiectasia mutated [ATM]) were shown to be elevated after myocardial infarction (MI) in both mouse and human hearts.
Results showed that splenic granulocytic (G-)MDSCs were significantly expanded by increasing the expression of CCR1 (CC chemokine receptor 1) in diseased MRL/lpr lupus mice and in high-disease-activity SLE patients.
Our results support a central role for G9a- and EZH2-mediated histone hypermethylation and a model of bidirectional, mutually reinforcing, and interdependent crosstalk between histone hypermethylation and DNA methylation in COX-2 epigenetic silencing in IPF.-Coward, W. R., Feghali-Bostwick, C. A., Jenkins, G., Knox, A. J., Pang, L. A central role for G9a and EZH2 in the epigenetic silencing of cyclooxygenase-2 in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis.
We investigated whether KIF6 Trp719Arg genotypes affect cardiovascular outcomes and efficacy of statin therapy in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus undergoing hemodialysis.
In patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus on hemodialysis, KIF6 Trp719Arg genotypes were not associated with adverse cardiovascular outcomes during follow-up or with the efficacy of atorvastatin therapy.
When compared with BMI- and blood pressure-matched control subjects, subjects with diabetes were associated with concentric LV remodeling, higher MTG, impaired myocardial energetics, and impaired systolic strain indicating a subtle contractile dysfunction.
Because cardiac steatosis is modifiable, strategies aimed at reducing MTG may be beneficial in reversing concentric remodeling and improving contractile function in the hearts of patients with diabetes.
MTG content and hypertriglyceridemia were determinants of the frontal plane QRS and WC and hyperglycemia were predictors of the QRS voltage.
Excessive myocardial triglyceride (MTG) content in obesity and type 2 diabetes is associated with impaired cardiac function.
This was a nested sub-study of a randomised placebo-controlled trial of the effect of 6 months of treatment with rosiglitazone added to existing therapy on myocardial triglyceride (mTG) content in patients with type 2 diabetes (T2D) and prevalent cardiovascular disease (CVD) or at least one additional risk factor.
Compared with placebo, treatment with rosiglitazone for 6 months had no discernible effect on mTG or left ventricular function in this population with long-standing diabetes and CVD.
In animal models and in men with type 2 diabetes mellitus, impaired cardiac function is associated with myocardial triglyceride (MTG) accumulation.
Therefore, we examined the relationship between circulating glucocorticoid levels, hepatic IFN-gamma expression, and hepatic T cell glucocorticoid receptor (GR) expression in a rat model of cholangitis to provide insight into the possible mechanism underlying hepatic T cell glucocorticoid resistance in cholangitic diseases.
Our results suggest that tau hyperphosphorylation and the sustained over-activated mTOR signalling under hyperglycemia may be due to the suppression of Cav-1.
Therefore, Cav-1 is a potential therapeutic target for diabetes-induced cognitive dysfunction.
These results point to intestinal epithelial cell CAV1 as a potential therapeutic target to lower circulating FFAs and LDL cholesterol, as high levels are associated with development of type II diabetes and cardiovascular disease.
On the basis of its role in vascular inflammation and in metabolic disorders, we hypothesised that the TNF superfamily (TNFSF) member 14 (LIGHT/TNFSF14) could be involved in the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes mellitus.
QR, RR (Q192R) and GC, CC (-909G/C) genotypes and L-C-A-R-G, L-T-A-R-G, L-T-G-Q-C haplotypes showed significant association with type 2 diabetes.
QR, RR, GC, CC genotypes and L-C-A-R-G, L-T-A-R-G, L-T-G-Q-C haplotypes are commoner in diabetics as compared to controls and may be related to genetic susceptibility to type 2 diabetes.
Blockade of TNFSF14 signaling caused a substantial reduction in the expression of lymphotoxin beta receptor (LTbetaR)-controlled migration factors within the islets and disrupts organization of tertiary structures, leading to prevention of diabetes.
Consistently, enhancing LTbetaR signaling by transgenic expression of TNFSF14 in the islets of NOD mice rapidly promoted de novo formation of local TLO, resulting in diabetes, even in the absence of draining lymph nodes (LN).
Thus, the TNFSF14-LTbetaR pathway appears to be critical in the development and maintenance of TLO for the onset of diabetes.
In this study, we demonstrate that islet TNF-alpha receptor 1 (p55) influences the expression of LIGHT (TNFSF-14), a TNF family member with both cytolytic and costimulatory properties, on BDC2.5 T cells and the expression of its receptor HVEM (TNFRSF-14) by islets, indicating a role for LIGHT-HVEM interactions in autoimmune diabetes.
Incidence of cervical cancer was around 10 per 100 000 women (age-standardised, world population, ASW) in the 1950s, 30 per 100 000 in the 1960s, and in the 1980s around 60 per 100 000.
The incidence of cervical cancer is highest in Greenland (25 per 100,000, age standardized, World Standard Population, ASW) and lowest in Finland (4 per 100,000 ASW) and rates in the other Nordic countries vary between 7 and 11 per 100,000 ASW.
The dissociation of the approximately 3500-kDa hexagonal bilayer (HBL) hemoglobin (Hb) of Lumbricus terrestris upon exposure to Gdm salts, urea and the heteropolytungstates [SiW11O39]8- (SiW), [NaSb9W21O86]18- (SbW) and [BaAs4W40O140]27- (AsW) at neutral pH was followed by gel filtration, SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, and scanning transmission electron microscopy.
The XPO1/CRM1 inhibitor selinexor (KPT-330), is currently being evaluated in multiple clinical trials as an anticancer agent.
XPO1 participates in the nuclear export of FoxO-1, which we previously found to be decreased in platinum-resistant ovarian carcinoma.
Eventually, a prospective lncRNA-miRNA-mRNA regulatory network of LINC00968, three miRNAs (miR-9, miR-22 and miR-4536) and two genes (polo-like kinase 1 and exportin-1) was obtained following validation in the Cancer Genome Atlas database.
The aim of this study was to explore the potential utility of chromosome region maintenance 1 (CRM1) inhibitor leptomycin B (LMB) in combination with gefitinib to overcome primary and acquired gefitinib resistance in NSCLC cells.
Previously, we found that p27kip1 nuclear-cytoplasmic translocation confers proliferation potential to cholangiocarcinoma cell line QBC939 and this process is mediated by crm-1.
Exportin-1 (XPO1) is the key mediator of nuclear export of many tumor suppressor proteins and is overexpressed in human cancers.
Silencing of XPO1 by either shRNA or selinexor significantly reduced cellular growth and induced cell cycle arrest, apoptosis of ATC cells by altering the protein expression of cancer-related genes.
Exportin 1 (XPO1) mediates nuclear export of many cellular factors known to play critical roles in malignant processes, and selinexor (KPT-330) is the first XPO1-selective inhibitor of nuclear export compound in advanced clinical development phase for cancer treatment.
By using a combination of array comparative genomic hybridization and a candidate gene approach, we identified nuclear factor I/X (NFIX) deletions or nonsense mutation in three sporadic cases of a Sotos-like overgrowth syndrome with advanced bone age, macrocephaly, developmental delay, scoliosis, and unusual facies.
These features prompted us to consider NFIX as a candidate gene for Marshall-Smith syndrome (MSS), a severe malformation syndrome characterized by failure to thrive, respiratory insufficiency, accelerated osseous maturation, kyphoscoliosis, osteopenia, and unusual facies.
Here we show that Plasmodium DNA induces autoreactive responses against erythrocytes by activating a population of B cells expressing CD11c and the transcription factor T-bet, which become major producers of autoantibodies that promote malarial anaemia.
Genetic polymorphisms in grainyhead-like 2 (GRHL2) variants were examined for their suspected association with sudden sensorineural hearing loss (SSHL).
More than 10 years ago, a c.1609_1610insC mutation in the grainyhead-like 2 (GRHL2) gene was identified in a large family with nonsyndromic sensorineural hearing loss, so far presenting the only evidence for GRHL2 being an autosomal-dominant deafness gene (DFNA28).
Among type 2 diabetics, 5 of the 10 trials reported incidence of diabetic retinopathy and 3 trials reported progression of retinopathy; one of the 10 trials reported a combined outcome of incidence and progression during a 4- to 5-year follow-up period.
One trial in which type 2 diabetics participated had reported no primary (or secondary) outcome targeted for this review.The evidence from these trials supported a benefit of more intensive blood pressure control intervention with respect to 4- to 5-year incidence of diabetic retinopathy (estimated risk ratio (RR) 0.80; 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.71 to 0.92) and the combined outcome of incidence and progression (estimated RR 0.78; 95% CI 0.63 to 0.97).
The available evidence provided less support for a benefit with respect to 4- to 5-year progression of diabetic retinopathy (point estimate was closer to 1 than point estimates for incidence and combined incidence and progression, and the CI overlapped 1; estimated RR 0.88; 95% CI 0.73 to 1.05).
Patients with TIA and those with ischemic stroke had similar prevalences of nondiabetic retinopathy (26.9% versus 29.5%; OR, 0.8; 95% CI, 0.5 to 1.6), diabetic retinopathy (55.5% versus 50.0%; OR, 1.3; 95% CI, 0.4 to 3.6), focal arteriolar narrowing (15.6% versus 18.4%; OR, 0.8; 95% CI, 0.4 to 1.5), and arteriovenous nicking (23.0% versus 17.8%; OR, 1.4; 95% CI, 0.7 to 2.7).
E2f1, Hsfy2, and Nfyb may be therapeutic targets for colon cancer.
Ezh2 and its TFs such as E2f1, Hsfy2, and Nfyb may be the potential therapeutic targets for anticancer agents development.
Further analysis identified nine transcription factors, these being GATA3, MZF1, GATA1, GATA2, SRY, REL, NFYB, NFYC, and NFYA, which could interact with HMGB3 to regulate target gene expression and consequently regulate gastric cancer cell proliferation, migration and invasion.
We evaluated possible changes in the expression of interleukin (IL)-10 family cytokines (IL26, IL-28A, IL28B, IL29), their receptor subunits (IL20RB, IL22RA2, IL28RA), and genes potentially related to functioning of melanocytes (MDM1, IFNA1, IFNB1, IFNG, and ICAM1) in the case of vitiligo.
We describe a male infant with intra-uterine growth retardation and multiple congenital anomalies including prominent forehead, broad nasal bridge, hypertelorism, small upturned nose, flat philtrum, micrognathia, cleft hard palate, low-set and posteriorly rotated ears, short neck, micropenis, hypoplastic scrotum with prominent raphe and undescended testes, malformed lower extremities with contractures, bony protruberance of left thigh, bilateral absence of the fibula, bilateral equinovarus deformity with missing 4th toe on the right foot and short second fingers, congenital heart defect, renal anomalies, brain malformation, and bilateral choanal atresia.
Copy number variants thought to be associated with risk for schizophrenia and related disorders also occur in affected individuals in Palau, specifically 15q11.2 and 1q21.1 deletions, partial duplication of IL1RAPL1 (Xp21.3), and chromosome X duplications (Klinefelter's syndrome).
Nine miRNAs (miR-30a, miR-30c, miR-31, miR-126, miR-140, miR-146b, miR-200c, miR-206, and miR-335) known to be tumor suppressive miRNAs in breast cancer were investigated in Genomic Data Common data portal miRNA-Seq dataset and The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) (n = 1052).
The aim of this study was to validate the potential role of miR-31 and BRCA1-associated protein-1 (BAP1) on regulating epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in cervical cancer.
In the present study, qRT-PCR assay revealed that the expression of miR-31 was upregulated in human cervical cancer cells and clinical tissues.
Furthermore, the results revealed that miR-31 promoted proliferation and EMT in cervical cancer cells and accelerated the development of tumor growth in vivo xenograft experiment by inhibiting BAP1 expression.
Overall, these results highlight an important role of miR-31 functioning as an oncomir which could promote EMT in cervical cancer via downregulating BAP1 expression.
Thus, downregulation of miR-31 could be a novel approach for the molecular treatment of cervical cancers and other malignancies.
We have previously identified that miR-31 may play suppressive roles in Alfa2Delta1+ hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) TICs.
However, the levels of miR-31, miR-155, miR-16, and miR-181a have not been explored in AS, but were verified to play vital roles in other immunological diseases.
Furthermore, miR-31, miR-155, miR-16 and miR-181a may be associated with AS disease activity.
However, whether miR-31 plays as an oncogene in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) and the potential target molecules are still unclear.
Within the top five of the miRNAs screened, we validated miRNA-31 (miR-31) and miR-135b as up-regulated, while miR-193a-3p was down-regulated in BRAF-mutated cancer.
Here we show that miR-31 is highly expressed in MaSC-enriched mammary basal cell population and in mammary tumors, and is regulated by NF-KB signaling.
Loss of miR-31 compromises mammary tumor growth, reduces the number of cancer stem cells, as well as decreases tumor-initiating ability and metastasis to the lung, supporting its pro-oncogenic function.
The present study examined the effects of a GABA(C) receptor antagonist on the light-evoked responses of retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) in a rat model of retinitis pigmentosa.
In conclusion, GABA(C) receptors may be novel targets for therapeutic interventions aimed at increasing light responsiveness in patients with retinitis pigmentosa or other diseases involving degeneration of photoreceptors.
rho(1) GABA(C) receptor antagonists inhibit myopia in chick but the site of this effect is not known.
GABA(C) receptors play a role in myopia, memory-related disorders and circadian rhythms signifying a need to develop potent and selective agents for this class of receptors.
Doses only 10 times greater than required to inhibit recombinant GABA(C) receptors caused the antimyopia effects.
In situ maturation of adventitial dendritic cells (DC) with expression of CD83 has been proposed as an early event in the pathogenesis of giant cell arteritis (GCA), preceding the appearance of an inflammatory infiltrate.
The aim of this study was to evaluate the added value of anti-CD83 staining of temporal artery biopsy (TAB) specimens in patients with biopsy-negative temporal arteritis.
We identified 7 potentially pleiotropic loci, that is rs3759579 (MARK3), rs2178950 (TRPS1), rs1473 (PUM1), rs9825174 (XXYLT1), rs2047937 (ZNF423), rs17277372 (DNM3), and rs335170 (PRDM6), associated with osteoporosis and obesity.
Dynamin 3 (DNM3) is candidate tumor suppressor against hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
Dynamin 1 and 2 both enhance cancer cell proliferation, tumor invasion and metastasis, whereas dynamin 3 has tumor suppression role.
In conclusion, DNM3 may be involved in risk to OCD.
Loss of CD26 (&gt;=80% CD4(+) T cells) and/or CD7 (&gt;=40% CD4(+) T cells) and combination of altered expression of STAT4, TWIST1, and DNM3 or PLS3 could distinguish, respectively, 83% and 98% of patients with Sezary syndrome from patients with erythrodermic inflammatory dermatoses with 100% specificity.
Zyxin is upregulated in human breast cancer and positively correlates with histological stages and metastasis.
We have previously shown that short-term feeding [20 to 25 day induction period (IP)] normal rats a sucrose-rich diet (SRD) results in an increase of plasma (P), liver (L), and heart (H) triacylglycerol (TG) levels, accompanied by a drop in plasma postheparin total (T-TGL) and hepatic (H-TGL) triglyceride lipases activities, IV glucose intolerance (low Kg) and hyperinsulin responses both in vivo and in vitro, suggesting that a state of insulin resistance had developed.
The aim of this study was the analysis of the umbilical cord serum sP-selectin levels in pregnancies complicated by severe preeclampsia with and without intrauterine growth restriction and in normotensive pregnancies.
Severe preeclampsia was associated with the highest levels of P-selectin (&gt;57 ng/mL) (OR = 3.4 [1.2 to 9.7]).
The aim of this study was the comparative analysis of the sP-selectin in pregnancies complicated by severe preeclampsia with intrauterine normal growth and small-for-gestational-age foetus.
Pregnant women with severe preeclampsia had higher maternal serum sP-selectin levels than the normotensive controls.
Our findings indicate an association between the increased levels of sP-selectin and severe preeclampsia.
To investigate the association of functional E and P selectin polymorphisms with severe preeclampsia.
P-selectin Thr715Pro and E-selectin Serl28Arg polymorphism were determined with the polymerase chain reaction in 126 women with severe preeclampsia and in 106 healthy pregnant women.
P-selectin is a marker of endothelium activation in patients with severe pre-eclampsia.
Serum P-selectin concentrations were consistently and significantly higher in the severe preeclampsia group than in the mild preeclampsia, healthy pregnancy, and non-pregnant control groups (P&lt;0.0001, for all).
The present study suggests that P-selectin may be an additional risk marker for preeclampsia, and may be useful in distinguishing women with mild and severe preeclampsia and normal pregnancy.
Herein, we investigated the role of a long noncoding RNA named MIR4697 host gene (MIR4697HG) in the cell growth and metastasis of ovarian cancer.
MIR4697HG was differentially expressed in ovarian cancer cell lines, with the highest levels in OVCAR3 and SKOV3 cells.
Consistently, in a xenograft model of ovarian cancer, MIR4697HG depletion also significantly restricted tumor volumes and weights.
These data suggested that MIR4697HG promoted ovarian cancer growth and metastasis.
The aggressive role of MIR4697HG in ovarian cancer may be related to the ERK and AKT signaling pathways.
Papillotubular-type invasive ductal carcinoma (INF Beta, ly3, v0, g+, f+, s+, nuclear grade 3 [atypia 3+mitosis 3]) was diagnosed histopathologically.
Histopathological diagnosis was M, type 1, 75 x 35 mm, papillary&gt;moderately-differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma [pT2 (MP), ly3, v0, pN2, Stage IIB].
Transverse colectomy (Cur A) was performed, histopathological examination indicated signet-ring cell carcinoma of the transverse colon, and the lesion was diagnosed as type 4, SS, ly3, v0, n1 (+), Stage III a. Postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy was recommended, but the patient was psychologically unstable and strongly rejected chemotherapy.
Histological examination showed papillotublar carcinoma, f, T3, ly3, v2, N2 (24/34), histological grade III, ER (-), PgR (-), HER2 (3+).
Pathological findings included poorly-differentiated adenocarcinoma, si (bladder), n 4, P 0, ly 3, v 3, H 0, M(-), Stage IV.
Medians (10 % and 90 % quantiles) were: age at surgery 48.4 months (23.6; 76.0), refraction (spherical equivalent)2.25 dpt (0.25; 5.50), posterior fixation 5.5 mm + 13.0 mm (12.5; 13.0) from limbus, recession 5.0 mm (4.0; 5.0), inferior oblique recession in 29 children (27 bilateral), preoperative squint angles at 5 m S/A 29 (20; 40), at 0.3 m S/A 35 (24; 45), postoperative at 5 m S 0 (-6; 10), A 2 (-6; 11), at 0.3 m S 1 (-5; 12), A 3.5 (-5; 13), S &lt;= 5 in 70.2 % at 5 m and 60.3 % at 0.3 m, consecutive exotropia 6-10 and &gt; 10 in 7.0 and 3.5 % at 5 m and 8.6 and 1.7 % at 0.3 m, residual esotropia 6-10 and &gt; 10 in 10.5 and 8.8 % at 5 m and 13.8 and 15.5 % at 0.3 m. Seven children (11.5 %) were re-operated for esotropia, four for exotropia (6.6 %).
In unilateral ptosis, esotropia was 21.4 % (n = 12), in bilateral ptosis, exotropia 19 % (n = 4), as well as astigmatism &gt; or = 3 dpt 26.2 % (n = 11).
We and others have subsequently shown that periostin is highly expressed in chronic inflammatory diseases-asthma, atopic dermatitis, eosinophilc chronic sinusitis/chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyp, and allergic conjunctivitis-and that periostin plays important roles in the pathogenesis of these diseases.
High serum periostin levels (&gt;= 95 ng/mL) at enrollment, the highest treatment step, higher ICS daily doses, a history of admission due to asthma exacerbation, comorbid or a history of sinusitis, and ex-smoking were associated with a decline in FEV1 of 30 mL or greater per year.
The following study tested the association of the 140A/G polymorphism of lactoferine (LF) encoding gene and the -33C/G polymorphism of osteoblast-specific factor-2 (OSF-2) encoding gene with a risk of chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyps in a Polish population.
We reported that the 140A/G LF (OR 4.78; 95% CI 3.07-7.24), the -33C/G OSF-2 OR 3.48; 95% CI 2.19-5.52) and the -33G/G OSF-2 (OR 16.45; 95% CI 6.71-40.30) genotypes were associated with an increased risk of chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyps among analyzed group of patients.
Moreover, the group of patients without allergy or asthma indicated the association of the -33C/G (OR 3.72; 95% CI 2.24-6.19 and OR 15.11; 95% CI 5.91-38.6) and -33G/G (OR 3.73; 95% CI 2.24-6.19 and OR 14.07; 95% CI 5.47-36.16) genotypes of the OSF-2 as wells as 140A/G (OR 3.89; 95% CI 2.40-6.31 and OR 3.62; 95% CI 2.45-5.34) genotype of OSF-2 with an increased risk of chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyps.
Finally, it was also found that the selected group of patients with allergy or asthma indicated a very strong association of the -33C/G (OR 2.40; 95% CI 1.23-4.69 and OR 2.40; 95% CI 1.23-4.69, respectively) and -33G/G (OR 16.01; 95% CI 5.77-44.41 and OR 17.90; 95% CI 6.53-49.05, respectively) genotypes of the OSF-2 as wells as 140A/G (OR 3.22; 95% CI 1.74-6.11 and OR 3.25; 95% CI 1.75-6.04, respectively) genotypes with an increased risk of chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyps.
Thus, our results suggest that LF and OSF-2 gene polymorphisms may have deep impact on the risk of rhinosinusitis nasal polyps' formation which may also depend on asthma or allergy.
Our results showed that the 140A/G polymorphism of LF gene and the -33C/G polymorphism of the OSF-2 gene may be associated with the risk of chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyps in a Polish population.
Eight genes were common to both treatments and were confirmed by Northern blot analysis: BRCA1, BIRC2/CIAP1, CENP-E, DDB1, MRE11A, RAD54/ATRX, Wip1 and XPF/ERCC4.
Chondroadherin, a member of the leucine-rich repeat family, has previously been demonstrated to be fragmented in some juveniles with idiopathic scoliosis.
A protein such as CHAD that can influence both cell metabolism and ECM organization could influence disc pathology in scoliosis.
In addition, proteolytic degradation of CHAD occurred in some patients with scoliosis, but not in normal IVDs.
Surprisingly, the binding molecule of Aa bacteria to the Aa_Mab was Aa chaperonin 60 or HSP60, a protein that is not only responsible for maintaining cellular proteins conformation, but also functions as a potent virulence factor prompting bone resorption in periodontitis and as a putative pathogenic factor in atherosclerosis.
When age, sex, smoking habit, and the number of teeth were considered in multivariate logistic regressions, Aa and Pg IgG, Hsp65-IgA, CuOx-LDL-IgG and -IgM, and MDA-LDL-IgG antibody levels were associated with periodontitis, whereas Hsp60-IgG2 antibody levels were inversely associated.
In all cases the lesional mast cells expressed SERPINB6, and, in diffuse cutaneous mastocytosis and mastocytoma, SERPINB6 was expressed by a substantially higher number of mast cells when compared with tryptase.
In Kimura's disease characterized by blood and tissue eosinophilia, OKT4-positive T cells from the patients spontaneously produce an ECF (LDECF-HES; pI 6) without any additional stimulation.
In contrast, PBD-RCDP is associated with defects in the PEX7 gene alone.
Mutations in PEX7 cause rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata (RCDP), a distinct peroxisome biogenesis disorder.
PEX7 mutations cause the peroxisome biogenesis disorder (PBD) rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata (RCDP).
Background Increased expression of vitronectin (VN) by smooth muscle cells (SMCs) promotes neointima formation after vascular injury, and may contribute to chronic vascular diseases, such as atherosclerosis.
Protein-Protein interaction analysis evidenced a network among differentially expressed proteins in which vitronectin seems to represent a potentially pivotal node among fibrinolysis, complement dependent immune responses and inflammation in accordance with a number of in vitro and in vivo evidences for a contributory role of these proteins to the development of diabetic atherosclerosis.
From AlfavBeta3, the hormone directs transcription of specific vascular growth factor genes, regulates growth factor receptor/growth factor interactions and stimulates endothelial cell migration to a vitronectin cue; these actions are implicated experimentally in tumor-relevant angiogenesis and angioproliferative pulmonary hypertension.
Vitronectin (VN), malondialdehyde (MDA) and high-sensitivity C-reactive rotein (hs-CRP) are cooperative agents involved in the atherosclerosis process.
The aim of this study was to prepare an anti-NYD-SP8 rabbit polyclonal antibody and investigate the expression of NYD-SP8 in human nasopharyngeal carcinoma cell lines and nasopharyngeal carcinoma tissues.
With this antibody, the NYD-SP8 expression in four nasopharyngeal carcinoma cell lines, CNE1, CNE2, 5-8F and 6-10B, was examined by Western blot and its expression in clinical tissues was also assessed by immunohistochemistry.
Immunohistochemistry demonstrated overexpression of NYD-SP8 in nasopharyngeal carcinoma tissue while the expression in normal nasopharyngeal tissue was negligible.
The different NYD-SP8 expression in various nasopharyngeal carcinoma cell lines indicated its complicated functions at different biological stages.
The overexpression of NYD-SP8 in clinical nasopharyngeal carcinoma tissue indicated that it could play an important role in nasopharyngeal carcinoma carcinogenesis.
Here, we report on a new pedigree with a germline ETV6 mutation in which the index patient and his father developed high hyperdiploid (HeH) ALL and polycythemia vera at age 13 and 51, respectively.
Genetic studies on consanguineous families with primary microcephaly have identified 15 (MCPH) causative genes that include MCPH1, WDR62, CDK5RAP2, CASC5, ASPM, CENPJ, STIL, CEP135, CEP152, ZNF335, PHC1, CDK6, CENPE, SASS6 MFSD2A ANKLE2 and CIT (Khan et al.
Results highlight a vast viral versus human peptide commonality that, in particular, involves centriolar and centrosomal components canonically cataloged as microcephaly proteins, i.e., C2CD3, CASC5, CP131, GCP4, KIF2A, STIL, and TBG.
This study confirms the involvement of CASC5 in autosomal recessive microcephaly and supports the hypothesis of a founder effect of the c.6125G&gt;A mutation.
CASC5, a gene encoding a protein important for kinetochore formation and proper chromosome segregation during mitosis, has been suggested to be associated with primary microcephaly-4 (MCPH4).
Our findings substantiate the proposed role of CASC5 for primary microcephaly and suggest that it also might be relevant for genome stability.
These results suggest SPARC might function as a tumor suppressor inhibiting angiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis in ovarian cancer by reducing the expression of VEGF-C and VEGF-D.
Together, these results provide a unique mechanism by which AR can either increase or decrease ccRCC metastasis at different sites and may help us to develop combined therapies using anti-AR and anti-VEGF-C compounds to better suppress ccRCC progression.The incidence of renal cell carcinoma is higher in males than in females due to the different androgen receptor signaling but the molecular mechanisms behind this gender bias are unclear.
The present findings demonstrated that VEGF-C mRNA expression in tumor tissues, blood and urine of bladder cancer patients was upregulated.
VEGF-C protein expression in bladder cancer tissues was also enhanced.
VEGF-C protein content in blood and urine from bladder cancer patients was elevated, consistent with the results for VEGF-C mRNA.
Therefore, the results of the present study indicate that the expression of VEGF-C mRNA and protein is upregulated in tumor tissues, blood and urine from patients with bladder cancer, while that of miR-186 is downregulated in these samples.
miR-186 potentially regulates the invasion and metastasis of bladder cancer via VEGF-C, and may become a gene marker for bladder cancer in the future.
Specifically, DENND1B, LYN, MRPL30, POC1B, PRKCB, RP4-655J12.3, HIBADH, and TMBIM4 were identified from the T2DM-control study, and BCAT1, BMP2K, CSRNP2, MYNN, NCKAP5L, SAP30BP, SLC35B4, SP1, BAP1, GRB14, HSP90AB1, ITGA5, and TOMM5 were identified from the obesity-control study.
Given BMP2 as a potential regulator involved in myopia development, we investigate whether gene BMP2-inducible kinase (BMP2K, BIKe), whose expression is up-regulated during BMP2-induced osteoblast differentiation, contributes to susceptibility of high myopia.
Participants grouped into high myopia had a spherical equivalent greater than -6.00 D, compared with a control group of spherical equivalent less than -0.5 D. Genotyping of polymorphisms 1379 G/A (rs2288255) and 3171 C/G (rs12507099), corresponding with 405 Gly/Ser and 1002 Thr/Ser variation in the BMP2K gene were determined by PCR-restriction fragment length polymorphism and associative study performed by comparing high myopic subjects and healthy controls.
These data suggest that BMP2K gene 1379 G/A variant is strongly correlated with high myopia and may contribute to a genetic risk factor for high degrees of myopic pathogenesis.
A destructive arthropathy is much more common when generalized osteoarthritis (GOA) and articular chondrocalcinosis (ACC) coexist than in GOA alone.
Our results indicate a melanocytic-cell-lineage-restricted expression of Pmel17/gp100 with significant transcript levels in all stages of melanoma progression, including early and amelanotic melanoma lesions, and a significantly differential expression between melanoma cells and normal melanocytes in vivo.
Here, in silico and manual sequence analyses revealed that a large proportion of O. tsutsugamushi strain Ikeda Anks bear a eukaryotic/poxvirus-like F-box motif, which is known to recruit host cell SCF1 ubiquitin ligase machinery.
These results demonstrate that O. tsutsugamushi strain Ikeda Anks can co-opt host cell polyubiquitination machinery, provide the first evidence that an O. tsutsugamushi Ank does so during infection, and advance overall understanding of microbial F-box proteins.
This study demonstrates that O. tsutsugamushi strain Ikeda Anks also bear F-box motifs that interact with host cell polyubiquitination machinery.
Escherichia coli expressing a functional T1SS was able to secrete chimeric hemolysin proteins bearing the C-termini of 19 of 20 O. tsutsugamushi Anks in an HlyBD-dependent manner.
Thus, O. tsutsugamushi Anks C-termini are T1SS-compatible.
This study identifies O. tsutsugamushi Anks as T1SS substrates and indicates that many display a tropism for the host cell secretory pathway.
Genes encoding proteins with eukaryotic-type ankyrin repeat domains (Anks) were identified upon genome sequencing of the C. burnetii Nine Mile reference isolate, which is associated with a case of human acute Q fever.
To detect the protein and mRNA expression levels of forkhead box C2 (FOXC2) in visceral adipose tissues with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) as well as the polymorphism of serum FOXC2 gene, and to discuss the correlations of FOXC2 with T2DM and with relevant indices of adipose metabolism.
The article also shows data on the effect of treatments of differentiated podocytes with various factors associated with obesity and diabetes on the expression level of FOXC2.
FOXC2 has lately been implicated in diabetes and obesity as well as mitochondrial function and biogenesis and also as a regulator of mtTFA/Tfam.
In this study, the expression of FOXC2 and selected genes involved in mitochondrial function and biogenesis in healthy subjects and in a matched cohort with type 2 diabetes patients before and after treatment with rosiglitazone was determined.
A study of 222 candidate genes in type 2 diabetes reported association of variants in RAPGEF1, ENPP1, TP53, NRF1, SLC2A2, SLC2A4 and FOXC2 with type 2 diabetes in 4,805 Finnish individuals.
Lgi1, Lgi2, Vlgr1 and, we show here, TSPEAR, cause disorders with auditory features: epilepsy, which can include auditory features in humans; audiogenic seizures in animals; and/or hearing impairments in humans and mice.
TRPM2 encodes a calcium channel receptor and TSPEAR encodes a peptide with repeats associated with epilepsy in the mouse.
We propose the rpl32-ndhF intergenic spacer (IGS), trnV-ndhC IGS, trnL-rpl32 IGS, psbT-petB region and ndhA intron as the best candidates for future phylogenetic studies in Hydrangeeae and potentially in other Asterids.
Two sarcoma cell lines were also treated with 10 ng/ml of six angiogenic growth factors (FGF1, FGF2, FGF7, FGF10, VEGF and SCF) for 24 h, and mRNA expression of endogenous FGF family members (FGF1, FGF2, FGF10, FGF11, FGF13 and FGF14) were quantitatively measured using RNase protection at various times following treatments.
Association and possible cause-effect correlation with H. pylori infection were suggested in diseases of dermatological interest such as chronic urticaria, rosacea, Henoch-Schoenleins purpura, idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, cutaneous and oral lichen planus, atopic dermatitis, recurrent aphthous stomatitis, systemic sclerosis, psoriasis, Sjoegrens syndrome, Behcet's disease, pruritus, alopecia areata, primary cutaneous marginal zone B-cell lymphomas, vitiligo, chronic prurigo, multiformis, prurigo nodularis, leukocytoclastic vasculitis, prurigo pigmentosa, eczema nummulare, primary cutaneous MALT-type lymphoma, sublamina densa-type linear IgA bullous dermatosis, Sweet's syndrome, cutaneous T-cell pseudolymphoma and pemphigus vulgaris.
Estimation of serum Immunoglobulins (IgG, IgM and IgA) and complements (C3 and C4) was carried out in 100 cases of alopecia areata as per method described by Mancini (1965).
Modification of dodecadeoxyribonucleotide d(pA-A-C-C-T-G-T-T-T-G-G-C) (I) with a heptanucleotide 4-(N-2-chloroethyl-N-methylamino)benzylidene (RCI) derivative d(pC-C-A-A-A-C) ARCI (II) and with similar reagent (III) bearing an additional 5'-terminal N-(2-hydroxyethyl)phenazinium residue (Phn) has been unvestigated.
The aim of this study is to investigate the effect of transdermal fentanyl (TDF) as an adjuvant to paravertebral block (PVB) for pain control after breast cancer surgery.
qRT-PCR showed that miR-370 was down-regulated in human glioma tissue and cells.
In addition, restoration of miR-370 exerted tumor-suppressive function via inhibiting cell proliferation, migration and invasion, while promoting the apoptosis of human glioma cells.
These results provided a comprehensive analysis of KCNQ1OT1-miR-370-CCNE2 axis in human glioma cells and might provide a novel strategy for glioma treatment.
However, the role of miR-370 in melanoma remains largely unknown.
The present study is designed to investigate the function of miR-370 in melanoma and to explore the molecular mechanism underlying its function.
The expression level of miR-370 was detected in melanoma tissues and cell lines by real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR).
Western blotting analysis was used to detect the influence of miR-370 on the expression of target genes, and Pearson analysis was used to calculate the correlation between the expression of targets gene and miR-370 in melanoma tissues.
Our study showed that miR-370 was upregulated in melanoma tissues compared with non-cancerous tissues (P&lt;0.01).
In addition, the expression of miR-370 in melanoma cell lines was also significantly higher (P&lt;0.01).
Enforced expression of miR-370 promotes melanoma cell proliferation, inhibits apoptosis and enhances invasion and glycolysis and led to downregulation of the PDHB protein.
Moreover, the expression level of miR-370 in melanoma tissues showed inverse relationship with the expression level of PDHB protein.
In conclusion, our findings suggested that miR-370 represents a potential oncogenic miRNA and plays an important role in melanoma progression by directly targeting PDHB.
We identified 60 miRNAs that were significantly increased in recurrent serous ovarian carcinoma compared with primary tumor tissue, including miR-630, miR-370, and miR-575.
Thus, our study demonstrated a critical clinical role of an up-regulated miR-370-3p expression in glioblastoma multiforme chemotherapy sensitivity.
The aim of this study was to explore the expression and biological role of miR-370-3p in human gliomas.
Clinical specimens from the brains of 20 glioma patients and 10 healthy controls were obtained to quantify the expression level of miR-370-3p using quantitative real-time PCR.
miR-370-3p expression was frequently found to be decreased in glioma tissues, and its expression level was negatively correlated with the malignant degree of the glioma.
Finally, in 20 glioma tissues the expression of miR-370-3p was negatively correlated with both protein and mRNA levels of Beta-catenin.
miR-370-3p suppresses glioma cell growth by directly targeting Beta-catenin, suggesting that the miR-370-3p/Beta-catenin axis may be a target for glioma therapy.
Three other miRNAs, miR-19b, miR-433, and miR-370 were associated with lymph node metastasis, decreased curvature, and poorly differentiated carcinoma.
A preliminary screening study suggested that down-regulation of miR-370 occurs in oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) tissue.
Squamous cell carcinoma tissues with perineural invasion had lowered miR-370 expression compared with contrasting OSCC.
Expression of four miRNAs (miR-30c, miR-30d, miR-30e-3p, miR-370) was significantly different between carcinomas and benign ovarian tissues as well as between carcinoma and borderline tissues.
#心#肌#缺#血#再#灌#注#损#伤(myocardial ischemia-reperfusion injury, MI/RI)#是#一#个#多#种#因#素#共#同#参#与#、#相#互#作#用#的#炎#症#级#联#反#应#过#程#。NOD#样#受#体#热#蛋#白#结#构#域3(NOD-like receptor pyrin domain containing 3, NLRP3)#炎#性#体#作#为#固#有#免#疫#系#统#的#重#要#组#成#部#分#在MI/RI#的#炎#症#损#伤#过#程#中#扮#演#关#键#角#色#。#此#外, #阻#断#或#抑#制 NLRP3#炎#性#体#激#活#及#其#下#游#炎#症#因#子#释#放#可#能#成#为MI/RI#新#的#治#疗#靶#点#。.
NLR family-pyrin domain containing 3 (NLRP3) was reported to affect a renal ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) injury by exerting a direct effect on the renal tubular epithelium.
Although the nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain- (NOD-) like receptor pyrin domain containing 3 (NLRP3) inflammasome has been recently detected in the heart, its role in cardiac ischemia/reperfusion (IR) is still controversial.
After 2 h he died of cardiac tamponade.
Ninjurin1 is involved in the pathogenesis of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, an animal model of multiple sclerosis, by mediating leukocyte extravasation, a process that depends on homotypic binding.
The collective data described here show that Ninj1 is required for the entry, adhesion, activation, and movement of leukocytes during tissue remodeling and might be a potential therapeutic target to regulate the adhesion and trafficking of leukocytes in inflammation and leukocyte-mediated diseases such as multiple sclerosis, diabetic retinopathy, and neuropathy.
Abnormal expression of Cables1 has been observed in multiple types of cancers and other diseases.
In this review, we summarize the characteristics of Cables1 and highlight the molecular mechanisms through which Cables1 regulates the development of cancer and other diseases.
Finally, we discuss future challenges in demonstrating the role and potential application of Cables1 in cancer and other diseases.
Cables1 expression is lost frequently in human cancer but little is known about its regulation.
Clinically, levels of phosphorylated Cables1 and phosphorylated Akt correlated with each other in human lung cancer specimens, consistent with pathophysiologic significance.
In further support of a potential pathophysiological role of Cables1, the expression level of Cables1 is tightly associated with p21 in both cancer cell lines and human lung cancer patient tumor samples.
This study investigates the role of CABLES1 in an in vivo mouse model of intestinal adenocarcinoma and in human colon cancer cell culture.
Beta-catenin activity in human colon cancer cells with CABLES1 inactivation and intestinal progenitor cell function in Cables1(-/-) mice were assayed in vitro.
Cables1 is a tumor suppressor gene on chromosome 18q in this in vivo mouse model and likely has a similar role in human colon cancer.
Loss of nuclear Cables 1 expression is observed in human colon, lung and endometrial cancers.
Our present objective was to examine Cables 1 expression in ovarian cancer in greater detail, and determine the predominant mechanisms of Cables 1 loss.
Although we detected no Cables 1 mutations, there was evidence of LOH at the Cables 1 locus and epigenetic modification of the Cables 1 promoter region in a subset of ovarian carcinomas and established cancer cell lines.
Together these findings suggest that multiple mechanisms underlie the loss of Cables 1 expression in ovarian cancer cells, supporting the hypothesis that Cables 1 is a tumor suppressor in human ovarian cancer.
To describe the electroclinical features of subjects who presented with a photosensitive benign myoclonic epilepsy in infancy (PBMEI).
In the current chapter, we will demonstrate the validity of human stem cell-based models and address the utility of other stem cell-based applications for several human brain disorders with multifactorial and (epi)genetic bases, including Parkinson's disease (PD), Alzheimer's disease (AD), fragile X syndrome (FXS), Angelman syndrome (AS), Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS), and Rett syndrome (RTT).
We will review our current knowledge on MeCP2-related diseases, including Rett Syndrome, Angelman Syndrome, Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder, Hirschsprung disease, and Cancer.
Both types of bruxism are associated with certain epigenetically determined disorders, such as Rett syndrome (RTT), Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS), and Angelman syndrome (AS), and these associations suggest a mechanistic link between epigenetic deregulation and bruxism.
Among these are classic disorders such as Angelman syndrome and MECP2-related disorder (formerly Rett syndrome), as well as more recently described clinical entities associated with mutations in CASK, CDKL5, CREBBP, and EP300 (Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome), FOXG1, SLC9A6 (Christianson syndrome), and TCF4 (Pitt-Hopkins syndrome).
Rett syndrome (RTT) and Angelman syndrome (AS) are devastating neurological disorders that share many clinical features.
Mutations in the X-linked gene encoding Methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 (MECP2) have been associated with neurodevelopmental and neuropsychiatric disorders including Rett Syndrome, X-linked mental retardation syndrome, severe neonatal encephalopathy, and Angelman syndrome.
Methyl-CpG binding protein 2 gene (MECP2) testing is indicated for patients with numerous clinical presentations, including Rett syndrome (classic and atypical), unexplained neonatal encephalopathy, Angelman syndrome, nonspecific mental retardation, autism (females), and an X-linked family history of developmental delay.
Briefly, sequencing of exons 1 to 4 of MECP2 is recommended for patients with a Rett syndrome phenotype, unexplained neonatal encephalopathy, an Angelman syndrome phenotype (with negative 15q11-13 analysis), nonspecific mental retardation, or autism (females).
Additional testing for large-scale MECP2 deletions is recommended for patients with Rett syndrome or Angelman syndrome phenotypes (with negative 15q11-13 analysis) following negative sequencing.
Antibodies to porcine PDC and Mycoplasma pneumoniae (mp) antigens mpPDH-C (to be designated mpPDC-E2 chain), mpPDH-B (to be designated mpPDC-E1beta chain), mpCARDS TX and mpP1 were investigated in sera from 43 PBC patients, 19 patients with autoimmune hepatitis and 11 healthy controls by an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and Western blotting.
We studied 77 serum samples, including 24 from patients with anti-PDC-E2-positive PBC and 53 controls (16 with autoimmune hepatitis (AIH), 10 with primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC), and 27 healthy individuals) for their reactivities at serial dilutions (1:10, 1:20 and 1:40) against Escherichia coli DH5 alpha lysate overexpressing human PDC-E2 using immunoblotting (IB).
Since frequency and significance of anti-PDC-E2 in patients with autoimmune hepatitis (AIH) remain obscure, we measured anti-PDC-E2 in sera from well-defined AIH cases by Western blotting using bovine heart mitochondrial protein and recombinant PDC-E2 protein as antigen sources.
A recent genome-wide association study has reported three newly identified susceptible loci (rs2842992 near the gene SOD2, rs1789110 near the gene MBP and rs722782 near the gene C8orf42) to be associated with the geographic atrophy subtype of age-related macular degeneration in European-descent population.
This study was undertaken to test the role of HNE-modified-histone-H2A (HNE-H2A) in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).
Because nitric oxide (NO)-related species have been found in inflamed joints of arthritis patients, we investigated whether nitrotyrosine is present in sera of RA patients, and whether peroxynitrite-modified H2A histone is likely to be involved in the induction and progression of RA.
Tranilast significantly reduced clinical and X-ray scores of arthritis and decreased numbers of TNF-alpha-positive mast cells and mRNA levels of TNF-alpha, chymase (mouse mast cell protease 4), tryptase (mouse mast cell protease 6), stem cell factor, interleukin-6, cathepsin-K, receptor activator of nuclear factor-kappaB, and of receptor activator of nuclear factor-kappaB-ligand, but increased interleukin-10 mRNA level in paws of arthritic mice.
K/BxN serum transfer-induced arthritis was also reduced by treatment with a chymase inhibitor.
Examples include cancer growth and metastasis (urokinase-type plasminogen activator, uPA), diabetes or transplant rejection (dipeptidyl peptidase IV, DPPIV), osteoarthritis and lung injury (elastase) or heart failure (mast cell chymase).
Here we investigated whether mouse mast cell protease-4 (mMCP-4), a chymase present in the mast cell secretory granule, contributes to experimental arthritis.
The studies using chymase inhibitors have also shown the potential role of chymase in other diseases, including atopic dermatitis, tissue fibrosis and rheumatoid arthritis; a chymase inhibitor also reduced ischemic reperfusion injury in the small intestine.
The NSpO2mean , DA4% and SB90% were significantly correlated with %DeltaTdi, PaO2 , %PImax of the predicted value and the Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) stage.
The case report describes novel data derived from miniature superficial sensors that continuously monitored the amplitude and symmetry of the chest wall tidal displacement (TDi) in a premature infant that suffered from pneumothorax.
The TDi responses to changes in peak inspiratory pressure (n = 7), induction of one-lung intubation (n = 7), and slowly progressing pneumothorax (PTX) (n = 6) were monitored in parallel with conventional respiratory (SpO(2), EtCO(2), pressure and flow) and hemodynamic (HR and BP) indices.
To gather data on this point, we computed TTdi by both methods in spontaneously breathing normal adult males (AMN) and age-matched males with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) at rest and during treadmill exercise.
Human fibrosarcoma HT1080 cells retained the ability to activate both prothrombin and plasminogen, but did not express TM.
Here, we describe the in vitro antitumor activity of some novel Pt(IV)-based agents against mouse fibrosarcoma L929 cells and human astrocytoma U251 cells.
The highly 1,25D up-regulated target genes CLMN, SERPINB1, EFTUD1, and KLK6were selected for further analysis and up-regulation by 1,25D was confirmed by qRT-PCR analysis in breast cancer cell lines and in a subset of human clinical samples from normal and cancer breast tissues.
Elevated expression levels of CLMN, SERPINB1, and KLK6 are associated with prolonged relapse-free survival for breast cancer patients.
Four of these 11 genes (CYP24A1, CLMN, EFTUD1, and SERPINB1) were also identified as 1,25D responsive in human breast tumor explants, suggesting that this gene signature may prove useful as a biomarker of vitamin D exposure in breast tissue.
We report here the identification of 14 genes that are rapidly induced by atRA (retinoic acid induced in neuroblastoma or RAINB), eight of which were previously not known to be atRA responsive (BTBD11, calmin, cyclin M2, ephrin B2, HOXD10, NEDD9, RAINB6 and tenascin R).
However, the roles of c-Src and phosphorylated-Src (p-Src) in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) progression are rarely investigated.
To investigate the influence of microRNA-378g (miR-378g) on radiosensitivity and metastasis of nasopharyngeal carcinoma cells and study how miR-378g regulated Src homology region 2 domain-containing phosphatase-1 (SHP-1) expression.
Hence, the present study was carried out to investigate the association of ACE and CYP46A1 genes polymorphism with senile cataract cases and controls.
Frequencies of ACE ID, DD, and II genotypes in senile cataract cases were 64.07%, 4.85%, and 31.06% and controls were 61.76%, 26.47%, and 11.76%, respectively.
ACE DD and II genotypes (P &lt; 0.001,P = 0.0008) and CYP46A1 CT and TT genotypes (P = 0.003,P = 0.0003) were significantly associated with senile cataract cases compared to the controls.
Findings of this study suggest that ACE and CYP46A1 genes polymorphism may be a predictive marker for early identification of population at risk of senile cataract.
This potential role of ACE and CYP46A1 genes polymorphism as a marker of susceptibility to senile cataract needs further validation in studies involving larger number of patients from different regions.
Treatments with ACEI and ARBs reduced the incidence of the occurrence of cataract.
The purpose of this study was to evaluate the effect of ACEIs on cataract formation in experimental alloxan-induced diabetes in rabbits and assess the role of the reactive function group of the ACEIs in this process.
Six-month administration of ACEI to rabbis resulted in a delay of diabetic cataractogenesis.
ACEIs delay diabetic cataractogenesis in an experimental animal model.
Quantification of GIP1-42 and GIP3-42 in plasma from patients with type 2 diabetes was possible using this method, which included protein precipitation, Asp-N proteolysis, solid-phase extraction, nanoflow LC, and positive-ion multiple reaction monitoring cubed (MRM(3)) for GIP1-8, and MRM for GIP3-8 to achieve accurate, precise, and quantitative analysis that can be validated to support large clinical trials.
Data mining on public domain identified that thymidylate synthetase (TYMS) and dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) transcripts were significantly higher expressed in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC).
Some genes differentially expressed between HPV-positive and HPV-negative oropharyngeal cancer (eg, TYMS, STMN1, CCND1, and RBBP4) are involved in chemotherapy or radiation sensitivity.
This case report of a NSE-producing primary hemangiosarcoma of the liver clearly outlines that a histological confirmation of an allegedly clear clinical diagnosis should always be performed because malignant tumours are capable of (co-)expressing so called tumour markers independently of their histogenesis.
They were characterized as follows: (1) disease onset with initial signs/symptoms due to intractable otitis media with effusion or granulation, which did not respond to ordinary treatments such as antibiotics and insertion of tympanic ventilation tubes, followed by progressive hearing loss; (2) predominantly female (73%) and older (median age: 68 years); (3) predominantly myeloperoxidase (MPO)-ANCA-positive (60%), followed by proteinase 3 (PR3)-ANCA-positive (19%) and both ANCAs-negative (16%); (4) frequently observed accompanying facial palsy (36%) and hypertrophic pachymeningitis (28%); and (5) disease often involving lung (35%) and kidney (26%) lesions.
A 69-year-old man was diagnosed with granulomatosis with polyangiitis (GPA) based on the presence of skin granuloma, refractory otitis media, renal insufficiency and myeloperoxidase-antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody positivity and slight lung opacity.
Proteinase 3-ANCA (PR3-ANCA) positive otitis media causes granulomatous formation or middle ear effusion in the middle ear, on the other hand myeloperoxidase-ANCA (MPO-ANCA) positive otitis media predominantly presents as otitis media with effusion.
In our cohort, MPO-GPA was most likely to affect older women and was associated with otitis media, nervous system involvement, mild renal impairment and more favorable outcome.
Myeloperoxidase-ANCA-positive hypertrophic pachymeningitis was characterized by: (i) an elderly female predominance; (ii) 82% of patients diagnosed with granulomatosis with polyangiitis (previously known as Wegener's granulomatosis) according to Watts' algorithm; (iii) a high frequency of patients with lesions limited to the dura mater and upper airways, developing headaches, chronic sinusitis, otitis media or mastoiditis; (iv) a low frequency of patients with the 'classical or generalized form' of granulomatosis with polyangiitis involving the entire upper and lower airways and kidney, or progressing to generalized disease, in contrast to proteinase 3-ANCA-positive hypertrophic pachymeningitis; (v) less severe neurological damage according to the modified Rankin Scale and low disease activity according to the Birmingham Vasculitis Activity Score compared with proteinase 3-ANCA-positive hypertrophic pachymeningitis; (vi) increased levels of CXCL10, CXCL8 and interleukin 6 in cerebrospinal fluids, and increased numbers of T cells, neutrophils, eosinophils, plasma cells and monocytes/macrophages in autopsied or biopsied dura mater with pachymeningitis, suggesting TH1-predominant granulomatous lesions in hypertrophic pachymeningitis, as previously reported in pulmonary or renal lesions of granulomatosis with polyangiitis; and (vii) greater efficacy of combination therapy with prednisolone and cyclophosphamide compared with monotherapy with prednisolone.
To quantify the levels of tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase 4 (TIMP4) and its ratios with free metalloproteinases (MMP) in the aqueous humor of patients with primary open angle glaucoma (POAG), pseudoexfoliation syndrome (PXS) and pseudoexfoliative glaucoma (PXG) and to evaluate a possible imbalance between MMPs and TIMPs in these samples.
TIMP4 was elevated in glaucoma patients(POAG: 0.95 +/- 0.49 PXG: 1.28 +/- 1.38 pg/ml.
TIMP4 elevation is a novel finding in glaucomatous eyes.
Emerging evidence demonstrates that the stromal derived factor-1 (SDF-1Alfa)/CXCR4 axis is associated with tumor aggressiveness and metastasis, including glioma, the most common brain cancer.
The CXCR4 chemokine and Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) morphogen pathways are well-validated therapeutic targets in cancer, including medulloblastoma.
Here, we discovered that dual inhibition of the SHH and CXCR4 pathways in a murine model of SHH-subtype medulloblastoma exerts potent antitumor effects.
Moreover, they provide a mechanistic rationale to evaluate the combination of SHH and CXCR4 inhibitors in clinical trials for the treatment of medulloblastoma, as well as other cancers driven by SHH that coexpress high levels of CXCR4.
The CXCL12/CXCR4 pathway regulates tumor cell proliferation, metastasis, angiogenesis and the tumor-microenvironment cross-talk in several solid tumors, including glioblastoma (GBM), the most common and fatal brain cancer.
Immunohistochemical staining for CXCR4, CXCR5, CCR7, CXCL12, and CXCL13 was performed on 89 tissue samples, including cases of primary central nervous system lymphoma (PCNSL), secondary CNS lymphoma (sCNSL), and systemic DLBCL.
Different types of cyto-chemokines are involved in the crosstalk between hAT-MSCs and BTICs (medulloblastoma and AT/RT: CXCR4/SDF-1, CCR5/RANTES, IL6R/IL-6 and IL8R/IL8; glioblastoma: CXCR4/SDF-1, IL6R/IL-6, IL8R/IL-8 and IGF1R/IGF-1).
Mutations in KCNJ5, ATP1A1, ATP2B3 and CACNA1D are found in aldosterone producing adenoma (APA) and familial hyperaldosteronism (FH).
Recurrent somatic mutations in KCNJ5, CACNA1D, ATP1A1, and ATP2B3 have been identified in aldosterone-producing adenomas (APAs).
Several novel susceptibility genes have been found to be mutated in aldosterone-producing adenomas: KCNJ5, ATP1A1, ATP2B3, CTNNB1, CACNA1D, CACNA1H and ARMC5 This review describes the genes currently known to be responsible for primary aldosteronism, discusses the origin of aldosterone-producing adenomas and considers the future clinical implications based on these novel insights.
KCNJ5, ATP1A1, ATP2B3, CACNA1D, CTNNB1, and CACNA1H mutations are causal of primary aldosteronism.
In contrast, primary steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome was associated with HLA-DR4 and DQ8.
These specific haplotypes were selected from our earlier work to include one haplotype bearing a short DQCAR allele (celiac disease and DR3,DQ2-DQCAR99) and two haplotypes bearing long DQCAR alleles (Diabetes Mellitus and DR4,DQ4-DQCAR 113 or 115 Idiopathic Nephrotic syndrome and DR7,DQ2-DQCAR 111-121).
Twelve patients underwent surgery, out of which 10 had prior leukopenia, 11 thrombopenia, 9 longer prothrombin times and all had hypersplenism.
Blood investigations confirmed the neutropenia and showed elongation of prothrombin time.
In four studies, renal denervation was compared to sham procedure; one study compared a proximal ablation to a complete renal artery denervation; in the remaining, renal denervation was tested against standard or intensified antihypertensive therapy.None of the included trials was designed to look at hard clinical end points as primary outcomes.When compared to control, there was low quality evidence that renal denervation did not reduce the risk of myocardial infarction (4 studies, 742 participants; RR 1.31, 95% CI 0.45 to 3.84), ischaemic stroke (4 studies, 823 participants; RR 1.15, 95% CI 0.36 to 3.72), or unstable angina (2 studies, 201 participants; RR 0.63, 95% CI 0.08 to 5.06), and moderate quality evidence that it had no effect on 24-hour ambulatory blood pressure monitoring (ABPM) systolic BP (5 studies, 797 participants; MD 0.28 mmHg, 95% CI -3.74 to 4.29), diastolic BP (4 studies, 756 participants; MD 0.93 mmHg, 95% CI -4.50 to 6.36), office measured systolic BP (6 studies, 886 participants; MD -4.08 mmHg, 95% CI -15.26 to 7.11), or diastolic BP (5 studies, 845 participants; MD -1.30 mmHg, 95% CI -7.30 to 4.69).
We evaluated the effects of metformin on serum 3-O-methylglucose (3-OMG; a marker of glucose absorption) and plasma total GLP-1 concentrations during a standardized intraduodenal infusion of glucose and 3-OMG in patients with type 2 diabetes.
Dynamic positron emission tomography (PET) imaging was performed using sequential tracer injections ([(15)O]H2O, [(11)C]3-O-methylglucose [3-OMG], and [(18)F]fluorodeoxyglucose [FDG]) to quantify, respectively, skeletal muscle tissue perfusion (glucose delivery), kinetics of bidirectional glucose transport, and glucose phosphorylation to interrogate the individual contribution and interaction among these steps in muscle insulin resistance (IR) in type 2 diabetes (T2D).
Plasma 3-OMG concentrations were significantly higher in type 2 diabetic patients than in healthy control subjects during acute hyperglycemia.
The up-regulated miRNAs in colon cancer included has-miR-194, has-miR-215, has-miR-93, has-miR-192, has-miR-92a, has-miR-29b, and has-miR-20a (median false discovery rate&lt;5%), while the down-regulated miRNAs were has-miR-1231, has-miR-195, has-miR-143, and has-miR-145 (median false discovery rate&lt;5%).
The ZNF217 gene, a potential oncogene amplified and overexpressed in several cancers including colorectal cancer (CRC), acts as a transcription factor that activates or represses target genes.
Automated FISH analysis was performed on 13 different colon cancer samples that had been stained for CD133; each sample was scored for MYC, ZNF217 and Chromosome 6 in CD133 positive and negative glands.
Automated FISH analysis was performed on 13 different colon cancer samples that had been stained for CD133; each sample was scored for MYC, ZNF217 and Chromosome 6 in CD133 positive and negative glands.
In this study we have defined the changes in gene copy number of the candidate oncogene ZNF217 during colon cancer development and progression.
Of the 100 colon cancers studied, 61 showed some level of amplification of ZNF217, 15 had loss of ZNF217, while 24 were diploid.
In this study we have found that ZNF217 amplification is a frequent event in colon cancer and that the extent of its amplification varies markedly between tumours (range 3-13 copies).
The inhibition of hindpaw (non-opiate) footshock-induced analgesia (HP-FSIA) by cimetidine, the histamine H2-receptor antagonist, was characterized in rats, and the drug's presence in brain was demonstrated.
Because previous studies have suggested that activation of baroreceptors could mediate stress-induced analgesia, the effect of acute exposure to footshock on mean arterial pressure (MAP) and pain sensitivity was simultaneously determined in conscious rats receiving the histamine H2 receptor antagonist cimetidine or vehicle.
The action of zolantidine, a histamine H2-receptor antagonist which penetrates the brain, was characterized on the analgesia elicited by brief continuous footshock of 3 intensities.
To test this hypothesis, we analyzed the expression of 15 members of the BCL-2 protein family (Bax, Bak, Bok, Bcl-2, Bcl-xl, Bcl-w, Mcl-1, Bad, Bid, Bim, Bik, Bmf, Hrk, Noxa and Puma) in glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) tumors, the most frequent brain tumor in adults.
We find that lung squamous cell carcinoma (SQCC), which accounts for ~20% of lung cancer, exhibits increased expression of the PI3K subunit PIK3R2, which is at low expression levels in normal tissues.
These results validate the use PIK3R2 interfering tools for the treatment of lung squamous cell carcinoma.
Our study explored whether the microRNA-126 (miR-126)-mediated PTEN/PI3K/AKT (phosphatase and tensin homology deleted on chromosome 10/phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase regulatory subunit-Beta/AKT) signaling pathway by targeting PIK3R2 affects the proliferation, migration, and invasion of non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) A549 cells.
The upregulation of miR-126 in NSCLC A549 cells can reduce the expression of the target gene PIK3R2 and influence the PTEN/PI3K/AKT signaling pathway, suppressing the proliferation, migration, and invasive abilities of A549 cells.
Included in the duplicated region is the gene EP300, mutations and deletions of which are implicated in Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome and thyrotroph embryonic factor, which has been proposed to be related to the pituitary hypoplasia seen in one patient with a large duplication, and several other genes without clear relation to disease.
We describe, for the first time in literature, a RTS Caucasian girl, 14-year-old, with growth hormone (GH) deficiency, pituitary hypoplasia, Arnold Chiari malformation type 1, double syringomyelic cavity and a novel CREBBP mutation (c.3546insCC).
We hypothesize that CREBBP mutation we have identified in this patient could be responsible also for RTS atypical features as GH deficiency and pituitary hypoplasia.
Evaluation of cognitive performance by using P300 ERPs has not been reported in acromegaly, and the comparisons of the P300 ERPs between the patients with GH deficiency and GH excess have not been done yet.
The mean P300 amplitude of the patients with acromegaly was significantly (P=0.005) lower when compared with that of normal controls and GH deficient patients at all electrode sites.
Using ERPs recordings, the present study indicates the prolongation of P300 latencies in patients with severe GH deficiency and reduction of P300 amplitudes in patients with acromegaly.
The present study was designed to investigate the effects of GHD and 6 months of GHRT on cognitive function in patients with Sheehan's syndrome by using P300 latency.
The present study, using P300 ERP latencies, therefore suggests an impairment of cognitive abilities due to severe GHD in patients with Sheehan's syndrome and an improvement of cognitive function after 6 months of physiological GHRT.
Abnormal laboratory findings included square wave jerks, upbeat nystagmus, and "bow tie" nystagmus by EOG, atrophy of the cerebellum and the brainstem by CT, a slight prolongation of the P300 latency, and a central diabetes insipidus pattern by water deprivation test and Carter-Robbins tests.
The expression of the VEGF-A gene proved to be higher in patients at a higher risk of acute leukemia and positively correlated with the expression levels of the VEGFR1 gene (p&lt;0.05) rather than that of the VEGFR2 gene.
Patients with intermediate-2 or high-risk acute leukemia showed an increase in the average expression levels of VEGF-A and VEGFR1 and a reduction in VEGFR2 expression.
It is concluded that the CTGF, CYR61, VEGF-C and VEGFR-2 mRNA and protein play a role in acute leukemia.
In acute leukemia (AML/ALL), the expression of above mentioned factor was high, but except VEGFR-2.
The expression levels of VEGF-C, VEGFR-2 mRNA in acute leukemia patients with extramedullary infiltration were higher than those in acute leukemia patients without extramedullary infiltration (p = 0.028, 0.047).
Further, corresponding to the morphological changes of nucleolus in number and size, these highly proliferating SSEA1 cells demonstrated coexpression of either D2-40 or the mesodermal marker Scl (stem cell leukemia), brachyury, and Flk-1 (vascular endothelial growth factor-2), respectively, indicative of the neoplasmtic transformation into the stromal or vascular cells.
Taken together, we conclude that cholesterol regulates VEGF:VEGFR-1 signaling on subsets of acute leukemias, modulating cell migration, and viability, which may be crucial for disease progression.
Consistent with an embryologically derived hemangioblast, the neoplastic cells demonstrated coexpression of the mesodermal markers brachyury, Flk-1 (vascular endothelial growth factor-2), and stem cell leukemia (Scl).
Furthermore, an inverse correlation between the expression levels of MTA1 and RNF144A was demonstrated in publicly available breast cancer microarray datasets and the MCF10 breast cancer progression model system.
Thirty-two per cent of 51 group A strains isolated from ARF family members (29 from throat, 22 from skin) were M11 or "M41" strains which were associated with ARF during the study, while only 8% were M1, T4 (MNT or 60) or M55 strains which were associated with AGN.
The purpose of the present study was to investigate the effect of ginger extract on apolipoproteins (apo) A and B, hyperhomocysteinemia, cathepsin G and leptin changes, as well as cardiac fibrosis and heart muscle cell proliferation under hyperglycemic conditions in vivo.
Compared with the wild-type haplotype TATG, the risks of dyslipidemia with CGCC, TGCC, or CATG haplotypes (odds ratios = 2.434, 1.503, and 2.740, respectively) were significantly higher.
Individuals carrying the CGCC, TGCC, or CATG haplotypes were prone to dyslipidemia.
CatG is involved in the pathophysiology of several serious human diseases, such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), Crohn's disease, rheumatoid arthritis, cystic fibrosis and other conditions clinically manifested by excessive inflammatory reactions.
Brains from scrapie-infected mice showed significantly decreased ELKS, an active zone matrix marker compared with those of age-matched control mice.
Prion diseases include Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) in humans, bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE, "mad cow disease") in cattle, scrapie in sheep, and chronic wasting disease (CWD) in deer and elks.
Spongiform encephalopathies include seven neurodegenerative diseases: three in man (Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, Gerstmann-Straeussler-Scheinker disease and kuru) and four in animals (scrapie, mink encephalopathy, bovine spongiform encephalopathy and chronic wasting disease in deer and elks).
Western blotting suggests that vinorelbine cleaves caspase-3, -9 and -8 and reduces the amount of mitochondrial cytochrome c. Caspase-8 deficiency suppresses all of these events.
Caspase-8 deficiency also inhibited the cytochrome c release induced by ER stress.
As increased serum levels and local overproduction of endothelin-1 in the airways are reported in cystic fibrosis (CF) patients, we reasoned that anti-ETAR antibodies could be prevalent in endstage CF patients prior to lung transplantation (LTx).
Cytogenetic investigations of malignant mesothelioma (MM) have revealed frequent losses in chromosomes 13 and 14, suggesting that inactivation of tumor suppressor genes (TSGs) residing in these chromosomes may contribute to mesothelial cell tumorigenesis.
Mutations in the with-no-lysine kinase 1 (WNK1), WNK4, Kelch-like 3 (KLHL3), and Cullin3 (CUL3) genes were identified as being responsible for hereditary hypertensive disease pseudohypoaldosteronism type II (PHAII).
Mutations in the with-no-lysine kinase 1 (WNK1), WNK4, kelch-like 3 (KLHL3), and cullin3 (CUL3) genes are known to cause the hereditary disease pseudohypoaldosteronism type II (PHAII).
Cullin-3 (CUL3) mutations (CUL3Delta9) were previously identified in hypertensive patients with pseudohypoaldosteronism type-II (PHAII), but the mechanism causing hypertension and whether this is driven by renal tubular or extratubular mechanisms remains unknown.
Pseudohypoaldosteronism type II (PHAII) is a hereditary hypertensive disease caused by mutations in four different genes: with-no-lysine kinases (WNK) 1 and 4, Kelch-like family member 3 (KLHL3), and cullin 3 (Cul3).
Approved recombinant enzymes are also now used as therapy for myocardial infarction (alteplase, reteplase, and tenecteplase), cystic fibrosis (dornase alfa), chronic gout (pegloticase), tumor lysis syndrome (rasburicase), leukemia (L-asparaginase), some collagen-based disorders such as Dupuytren's contracture (collagenase), severe combined immunodeficiency disease (pegademase bovine), detoxification of methotrexate (glucarpidase), and vitreomacular adhesion (ocriplasmin).
These results suggested that the mechanical induction of uPA, tPA and uPAR upregulated PA activity, which may provide a proteolytic environment of extracellular matrix components and subsequently contribute to the cartilage degradation in TMJ osteoarthritis.
Plasma concentrations of interleukin-6 (IL-6), tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-Alfa), interleukin-10 (IL-10), N-terminal-proatrial natriuretic peptide (NT-proANP) and N-terminal-probrain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) were assessed and echocardiographic measurements were performed in twenty-eight patients with atrial septal defect prior to, and at the first, second and sixth months post transcatheter closure.
SOCS3 was found significantly declined, while microRNA-221 (miR-221) obviously up-regulated in bladder cancer tissue.
This study investigated the role of miR-221 in regulating SOCS3/JAK-STAT3 signaling pathway and bladder cancer cell proliferation and apoptosis.
Bladder cancer tumor tissue and para-carcinoma tissue were collected from patients to test miR-221 and SOCS3 expressions.
MiR-221 significantly increased, while SOCS3 obviously reduced in bladder cancer tissue compared with para-carcinoma tissue.
MiR-221 elevated, while SOCS3 reduced in bladder cancer tissue.
In this study, we investigated the role of miR-221 in the development and progression of clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC).
Then, we investigated the role of miR-221 to determine its potential roles on renal cancer cell proliferation, migration and invasion in vitro.
A luciferase reporter assay was conducted to confirm the target gene of miR-221 and the results were validated in renal cancer cells.
Knocked-down expression of miR-221 remarkably inhibited cell proliferation, migration and invasion of renal cancer cells.
These findings suggested that miR-221 play an oncogenic role in the renal cancer cell proliferation, migration and invasion by directly inhibiting the tumor suppressor TIMP2, indicating miR-221 act as a potential new therapeutic target for the treatment of ccRCC.
miR-221, as oncogenes in several human cancers, was significantly up-regulated in bladder cancers.
However, the role of miR-221 in the progression of bladder cancer metastasis remains largely unknown.
We used qRT-PCR and western blot to accurately measure the levels of miR-221, STMN1 and EMT markers in TGFBeta1 induced EMT of bladder cancer cells.
miR-221 inhibitors were re-introduced into bladder cancer cells to investigate its role on tumor metastasis which was measured by MTT, wound healing, transwell invasion and adherent assays.
miR-221 expression was greatly increased by TGFBeta1 in bladder cancer cell.
Furthermore, miR-221 expression is positively correlated with malignant potential of bladder cancer cell through promoting loss of cell adhesion and prometastatic behavior.
Our study demonstrated that miR-221 facilitated TGFBeta1-induced EMT in human bladder cancer cells by targeting STMN1 and represented a promising therapeutic target in the process of metastasis.
to study the expression of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) in patients with seborrheic keratomas (SK) and insulin resistance (type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM2)) and in those without concomitant carbohydrate metabolic disturbances.
The increased EGFR expression revealed in patients with SK and concomitant DM2 is caused by insulin resistance and hyperinsulinemia, in which the dysregulation of insulin signal transmission into the cell leads to changes in EGF synthesis and signaling pathway that regulates cell proliferation and growth.
When obesity was eliminated, there was a significantly higher levels for EGF, IL-8, MCP1 and TNFAlfa and lower levels for IL-1Alfa and IL-3 in the postmenopausal group (p&lt;0.05).
The patient had a family history of hyperuricemia and stage IV CKD; both the patient and her affected family members had a novel mutation in the UMOD gene: c.C518G (p.P173R), located between the EGF-like domains and D8C.
To study the expression of cadherin17(CDH17) in metanephric adenoma (MA), and to explore the value of CDH17 in the diagnosis of metanephric adenoma.
The expression of CDH17 was also examined in other common renal epithelial tumors, including 10 cases of clear cell renal cell carcinomas (CCRCC), 10 chromophobe renal cell carcinomas (CHRCC), and 10 oncocytomas.
CDH17 was negative in all cases of CCRCC, CHRCC and oncocytoma.
Ksp-cadherin showed positive staining in 100% (7/7) of chromophobe RCCs and 33% (4/12) of oncocytomas.
Here, we report a comprehensive analysis of sE-cadherin levels in sera from patients with CRC, colorectal adenoma, inflammatory bowel disease and familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP).
In the present study, the expression of BNIP3 in pancreatic cancer tissues, the correlation with clinicopathological characteristics and prognosis and the regulation of this protein in pancreatic cancer cell lines with regard to the induction of apoptosis were investigated.
BNIP3 expression was significantly lower in pancreatic cancer tissues compared with normal epithelia and was associated with tumor size, clinical stage, and lymph node metastasis.
The restoration of BNIP3 expression in pancreatic cancer cells in vitro, caused loss of DeltaPsim, increase in ROS production, and apoptosis induction.
The opposite effect was observed in pancreatic cancer cells, following BNIP3 silencing by RNAi.
The absence of BNIP3 expression in pancreatic cancer cells was related to gene methylation that suppressed binding of HIF-1Alfa to the BNIP3 promoter, whereas 5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine (Aza-dC) treatment restored BNIP3 expression and sensitized pancreatic cancer cells to BNIP3-induced apoptosis.
The findings indicated that BNIP3 was significantly downregulated in pancreatic cancer resulting in reduced apoptosis induction.
The data suggest that BNIP3 reactivation is a potential target for therapeutic intervention against pancreatic cancer.
This study aimed to investigate the expression and implications of the major autophagy-related molecules light chain (LC) 3A, LC3B, p62, and BNIP-3 in human thyroid carcinoma.
Apoptosis, but not autophagy, that is induced via p21-activated BNIP3 expression accounts for the efficacy of ICMT inhibition in sensitive pancreatic cancer cells in both in vitro and in vivo models.
Using a yeast two-hybrid screening approach, based on a thyroid cancer patients library, we showed that CDH6 directly interacts with GABARAP, BNIP3 and BNIP3L, and that through these interactions CDH6 restrains autophagy and promotes re-organization of mitochondrial network through a DRP1-mediated mechanism.
Furthermore, overexpression of miR-148b and -152 in pancreatic cancer cell lines (MIA PaCa-2 and AsPC-1) decreased DNMT-1 expression (53% and 59% respectively), returned DNA methylation to normal patterns and induced re-expression of tumor suppressor genes, like BNIP3 (4.7- and 3.8-fold) and SPARC (5.3- and 2.9-fold) for miR-148b and -152 respectively.
Conclusively these findings mean that miRs that are targeting DNMT-1 and modifying methylation status of tumor suppressor genes such as BNIP3 and SPARC can be applied in killing the pancreatic cancer cells and decreasing the tumorigenicity of these cells.
The combination of gossypol and BRD4770 increased LC3-II levels and the autophagosome number in PANC-1 cells, and the compound combination appears to act in a BNIP3 (B-cell lymphoma 2 19-kDa interacting protein)-dependent manner, suggesting that these compounds act together to induce autophagy-related cell death in pancreatic cancer cells.
Only HS-18, a liposarcoma cell line, lacked expression of the retinoblastoma protein.
Growth inhibition assays indicated that the IC50 values for methotrexate (MTX) and 5-fluorodeoxyuridine (FdUrd) in HS-18, a liposarcoma cell line lacking retinoblastoma protein (pRB), and SaOS-2, an osteosarcoma cell line with a truncated and nonfunctional pRB, were 10- to 12-fold and 4- to 11-fold higher, respectively, than for the HT-1080 (fibrosarcoma) cell line, which has wild-type pRB.
Failure to consider the diagnosis of secondary achalasia can lead to multiple fruitless attempts at dilatation or even inappropriate reoperations.
Sixteen patients with stroke for more than 3 mos were randomly assigned into the experimental and control groups.
This cross-sectional-designed study enrolled 145 stroke patients at three different stroke duration periods (&lt;=3 mos, 3 mos to 1 yr, and &gt;1 yr) receiving inpatient or outpatient rehabilitation programs in a regional teaching hospital.
The patients with stroke duration within 3 mos had the highest spontaneous muscle pain intensity and were most sensitive to pressure pain, with a prevalence of 48.3% of moderate to severe pain intensity (verbally reported numerical rating scale, 4-10) in the hemiparetic side.
The aim of the present study was to analyze the effects of whole-body vibration on lower limb muscle architecture, muscle strength, and balance in stroke patients during a period of 3 mos.
Correlation and linear regression analyses of pretreatment and end-of-treatment Fugl-Meyer scores and modified Emory Functional Ambulation Profile scores from hemiparetic subjects (n = 108, &gt;3 mos post stroke) who participated in a randomized controlled trial comparing two 12-wk ambulation training treatments were generated.
Further, EGFL7 became upregulated in vessels of the stroke penumbra using a mouse model of reversible middle cerebral artery occlusion.
Our previous research provided evidence of periostin increase in parallel with interleukin-13 (IL13) increase in the synovial fluid of patients with osteoarthritis (OA).
Recent studies indicated that periostin is involved in the pathogenesis and progression of knee osteoarthritis (OA).
We investigated the role of periostin, an extracellular matrix protein, in the pathophysiology of osteoarthritis (OA).
Our aim was to investigate the relationships between serum periostin (POSTN) and both prevalence and incidence/progression of knee osteoarthritis (OA) in women.
GADD45G and SPTBN1 not only contribute to tumor progression in hepatocellular carcinoma, but also correlate with poor prognosis in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma and pancreatic cancer respectively.
Furthermore, the adenovirus-mediated delivery of Gadd45gamma gene in anaplastic thyroid cancer resulted in the inhibition of tumor growth in vivo.
This in vitro and in vivo activity of the adenovirus-mediated transduction of CR6/Gadd45gamma, on anaplastic thyroid cancer cell growth suppression, was reminiscent of the effects of p53.
This study demonstrates that the Gadd45gamma gene has potential use as a candidate gene for gene therapy in anaplastic thyroid cancer.
We observed perivascular and parenchymal T lymphocytes (CD8+, T-cytotoxic) with granzyme-B+ granules in FCD IIb and TSC specimens.
Toll-like receptor 9 (TLR9) is a key immunotherapy target for glioblastoma (GBM).
This study explored the correlation of TLR9 expression with tumor location and survival outcomes in patients with supratentorial GBM.
We retrospectively identified 46 patients with supratentorial GBMs and divided them into those with high TLR9 (TRL9High) and low TLR9 (TRL9Low) levels.
The TLR9 expression percentages for the GBM specimens were TRL9High: 72% (33/46) and TRL9Low: 28% (13/46).
Patients with TRL9Low supratentorial GBM tend to have longer survival than those with higher TLR9 expression.
The aim of this study was to assess the association and prognostic value of TLR9 and NFKBIA with clinical significance and also their impact on patient survival in human glioma.
Quantitative real-time PCR analysis showed that TLR9 mRNAs is markedly expressed in glioma tissues than in non-neoplastic tissues (mean+/-SD: 3.26+/-0.40 vs. 0.71+/-0.36, P&lt;0.001).
There was also a significant difference between TLR9 mRNAs and high grade glioma (P&lt;0.001).NFKBIA mRNAs was significantly identified in non-neoplastic tissues compared with glioma specimens (mean+/-SD: 2.76+/-0.30 vs. 0.94+/-0.35, P&lt;0.001).
Furthermore, Immunoreactivity for high expression of TLR9 was detected in 65% of cases (26/40) that was associated with high grade glioma (P=0.001).
These data indicate that TLR9 and NFKBIA protein expressions act as independent predictor of survival for the diagnosis of glioma and a prognostic biomarker for those with a tumor at an advanced pathological grade.
Investigation of the molecular mechanisms demonstrated that CpG ODN107 + irradiation increased the levels of TLR9 and p-ERK, and decreased the level of p-mTOR in glioma cells.
Further, TLR9-specific siRNA could affect the expressions of p-ERK and autophagy-related proteins in glioma cells.
Taken together, CpG ODN107 combined with irradiation could induce autophagic cell death, and this effect was closely related to the TLR9-ERK-mTOR signaling pathway in glioma cells, providing new insights into the investigation mechanism of CpG ODN.
Here, we show that the Toll-like receptor TLR9 is elevated in glioma stem-like cells (GSC) in which it contributes to glioma growth.
Our findings identify TLR9 as a functional marker for GSC and a target for the delivery of efficacious therapeutics for glioma treatment.
The aim of this study was to determine if there was an association between expression of toll-like receptor 9 (TLR9) in glioblastoma tissue and patient outcome in glioblastoma multiforme.
Further, we characterized the direct in vitro effects of the TLR9 agonist, CpG oligodeoxynucleotide (ODN), commonly used as a vaccine adjuvant in cancer immunotherapy, on glioma cells.
TLR9 expression was assessed using immunohistochemical techniques, and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays were used to investigate the expression of other proteins in glioma cells relevant to immunotherapy.
In in vitro glioma cells, there was a positive correlation between the protein levels of TLR9 and both matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-2 and MMP-9 (p&lt;0.05), but no relationship between TLR9 levels and levels of interleukin-6, transforming growth factor-Beta2 or signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)-3 (p&gt;0.05).
Our data indicate that expression of TLR9 correlates with shorter progression-free survival and overall survival in patients with glioblastoma multiforme.
Our findings also indicate that caution is warranted when directly injecting the TLR9 agonist CpG ODN into glioma tissues as part of glioma immunotherapy.
This study was a pilot project to assess the safety and efficacy of carboxypeptidase G2 (CPG2) rescue from high-dose (HD) methotrexate (MTX) in patients with recurrent cerebral lymphoma.
To estimate the prevalence of the genotypes of the candidate genes ACE (I/D, rs4646994), ADRB1 (Ser49Gly, A/G, rs1801252) ADRA2B (I/D), MTHFR (C677T, Ala222Val, rs1801133), and eNOS (4b/4a) and their association with hypertension in two ethnic groups of Mountain Shoria.
Hypertension was associated with the ACE DD, MTHFR CT, and ADRB1 AA genotypes in the native ethnic group and with the ACE ID genotype in the non-indigenous population.
CLLU1, located at chromosome 12q22, encodes a transcript specific to chronic lymphocytic leukemia and has potential prognostic value.
CLLU1 expression analysis helps to refine the prognosis of patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia who have mutated IGHV genes.
The expression levels of LPL, ZAP70, TCL1A, CLLU1 and MCL1 have recently been proposed as prognostic factors in chronic lymphocytic leukemia.
To investigate the expression level of chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) up-regulated gene 1 (CLLU1) mRNA in CLL and its prognostic value in CLL.
Plasminogen precursor, Apo A-IV precursor, C4A/C4B complement, C2 precursor, Vitamin D binding protein and hypothetical protein are differentially expressed in oral lichen planus patients before and after hydroxychloroquine therapy, but the results need to be validated by other biochemical technologies.
In order to study if in patients with hereditary angioedema (HAE), copy number of the two genes (C4A and C4A) encoded in the central region of main histocompatibility complex (MHC) influences the diagnostically important C4 serum concentration as well as the clinical course of the disease, we determined copy number of the complement C4A and C4B genes in DNA samples of 95 HAE patients and 246 healthy controls.
The study aimed to investigate the impact of clopidogrel combined with proton pump inhibitors (PPI) pantoprazole treatment on the prognosis of patients with transient ischemic attack (TIA).
The statistical model showed that bruxism was a statistically significantly risk factor to implant failure (HR 3*396; 95% CI 1*314, 8*777; P = 0*012), as well as implant length, implant diameter, implant surface, bone quantity D in relation to quantity A, bone quality 4 in relation to quality 1 (Lekholm and Zarb classification), smoking and the intake of proton pump inhibitors.
The objective of this study was to quantify the relative risk of seizure associated with the use of proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) and histamine-2 receptor antagonists (H2RAs) in a general population, overall and stratified by epilepsy status, and to determine the effects of demographics and comorbidities.
A viral homolog of human interleukin-6 (hIL-6) named viral interleukin-6 (vIL-6) is encoded by KSHV and expressed in KSHV-associated cancers.
We also observed transcripts at the EBV vIL-10 locus exclusively in the Hodgkin's lymphoma cell line, Hs 611.T, the expression of which were uncoupled from other lytic genes.
EBV transcriptome analysis showed expression of vIL-10 transcripts in a Hodgkin's lymphoma that was uncoupled from lytic genes.
Collectively, our data indicate that HYOU1 is important for vIL-6 function and may play a role in the pathogenesis of KSHV-associated cancers.
We investigated the role of activated B cells in thrombopoiesis through the production of interleukin (IL)-1beta and IL-6 in patients with essential thrombocythaemia.
However, the number of IL-1beta/IL-6-producing B cells was significantly higher in essential thrombocythaemia patients than that in healthy controls.
In a previous study, we found increased plasma soluble receptor for interleukin-6 (sIL-6R) levels in patients with essential thrombocythemia (ET) that could promote megakaryopoiesis through IL-6 binding and further interaction with the signal transducer gp130.
Moreover, LSC loss leads to corneal opacity and blindness, while limbal grafting restores patients' vision.
Cornea epithelial cells (CECs) undergo continuous renewal from limbal stem or progenitor cells (LSCs), and deficiency in LSCs or corneal epithelium--which turns cornea into a non-transparent, keratinized skin-like epithelium--causes corneal surface disease that leads to blindness in millions of people worldwide.
Loss of WNT7A or PAX6 induces LSCs into skin-like epithelium, a critical defect tightly linked to common human corneal diseases.
Corneal epithelial homeostasis and regeneration are sustained by limbal stem cells (LSCs), and LSC deficiency is a major cause of blindness worldwide.
Identification and prospective isolation of molecularly defined LSCs with essential functions in corneal development and repair has important implications for the treatment of corneal disease, particularly corneal blindness due to LSC deficiency.
In rabbit total limbal stem cell deficiency (LSCD) models, the tissue-engineering graft had the potential to reconstruct the damaged ocular surface and alleviated the invasion of corneal neovascularization.
Limbal Stem Cell Deficiency (LSCD) can lead to corneal opacity and vascularization, with consequent visual impairment or blindness.
Transcription levels of pluripotency-related (octamer binding protein 4, Nanog), osteogenesis-related (collagen type I, Runx2, alkaline phosphatase, and bone sialoprotein), and chondrogenesis-related (collagen types II and X, and aggrecan) genes were not predictive of either bone or teratoma formation.
In addition, IGF-1, PTEN, Akt1, Akt2, FoxO3 and FoxO4 gene expression levels were upregulated following WRS, and peaked after 7 h of WRS.
Specifically, PTEN, FoxO3a and FoxO4 were also localized in the cellular cytoplasm of lamina propria of restituted villi in the duodenal mucosa of rat subjected to WRS.
In addition, messenger RNA transcript levels of IGF-1, PTEN, Akt1, Akt2, FoxO3, and FoxO4 were upregulated in the duodenal mucosa, with a peak between the 4th and 8th day after 7 h of WRS.
Moreover, in the rat gastric ulcers, the mRNA transcript levels of IGF-1, PTEN, Akt-1, Akt-2, FoxO3 and FoxO4 were upregulated in the gastric ulcer margin, with a peak between Days 4 and 8 following 7 h of WRS.
From August 2003 through February 2006, 100 drug-resistant symptomatic patients with lone atrial fibrillation underwent thoracoscopic off-pump closed-chest epicardial ablation using the FLEX 10 AFx Microwave Ablation System (Guidant, Indianapolis, IN, USA).
The t(4;14) (p16; q32) with fusion of the IGH (immunoglobulin heavy chain) and FGFR3 (fibroblast growth factor receptor 3) genes are rarely present in patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), with only two previously reported cases.
These include t(4;14) multiple myeloma associated with ectopic expression of FGFR3 and t(4;12)(p16;p13) acute myeloid leukemia associated with expression of a constitutively activated fusion tyrosine kinase, TEL-FGFR3.
The expression levels of fgfr3 mRNA in 4 leukemic cell lines and bone marrow samples from 96 patients with leukemia and 14 controls were assayed by RT-PCR.
AA genes with highest degree and betweenness were considered as hub genes of GCN, namely CDC20, MELK, PTTG1, CCNB2, CDC45, CCNB1, TK1 and PSMB2, which could distinguish cancer from normal controls with ALDOA.
Herein, we investigated whether the angiotensin II receptor-neprilysin inhibitor sacubitril/valsartan (LCZ696) would improve reduced EDH-mediated responses and whether LCZ696 would exert additional effects on endothelium-dependent and endothelium-independent vasorelaxation compared with an angiotensin II type 1 receptor blocker alone during hypertension.
The efficacy and safety of sacubitril/valsartan (LCZ696), a first-in-class angiotensin receptor neprilysin inhibitor, vs. olmesartan was evaluated in elderly Asian patients (&gt;=65 years) with systolic hypertension.
Cytoplasmic AR expression (AR1 and AR2) in tumors trended higher in those with higher serum adiponectin levels and in those with diabetes mellitus, but the association was not statistically significant.
Pancreatic carcinoma (n = 7), pancreatitis tissue (n = 4), normal pancreas tissue (n = 5), colonic adenocarcinoma (n = 4) and in vitro human pancreatic cancer cell lines (n = 6) were studied with the murine monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) 3DS2A, AR1-28, AR2-20, Ca19-9 and CA17-1A to determine their immunohistologic specificity and sensitivity for use as radiolabeled diagnostic imaging agents.
In one subject with complete androgen insensitivity syndrome, a reduction in size of the 2.4 kilobase band hybridizing to hAR1 was noted.
Moreover, in other forms of spondyloarthropathy, a similar association has been reported: 42% of patients with spondyloarthropathy and associated asymptomatic chronic gut inflammation, who are considered likely to develop Crohn's disease and ankylosing spondylitis, are carriers of at least one CARD15 mutation, compared with only 7% of patients with normal histology.
According the importance of genetic factors in the etiopathogenesis of both diseases (mutation in the NOD2 gene for Crohn--HLA-B27 phenotype for spondyloarthropathy) future studies are necessary to find a common alteration explaining the link between gut and joint.
A recent publication in Science identifies the cytosolic adapter molecule MAVS as being responsible for species restriction of infection with hepatitis A virus as well as linking cytosolic immune sensing in infected hepatocytes with innate effector functions and protective adaptive immunity.
To refine the role of MAVS subcellular localization for the induction of type I and III IFN responses in hepatocytes and its counteraction by the hepatitis C virus (HCV), we generated various functional and genetic knock-out cell systems that were reconstituted to express mitochondrial (mito) or peroxisomal (pex) MAVS, exclusively.
To determine whether viral counteraction of MAVS is affected by its subcellular localization we employed infection of cells with HCV, a major causative agent of chronic liver disease with a high propensity to establish persistence.
To identify components that regulate MAVS signalosome assembly on the MAM, we characterized the proteome of MAM, ER, and cytosol from cells infected with either chronic (hepatitis C) or acute (Sendai) RNA virus infections, as well as mock-infected cells.
TTC19 deficiency is a progressive neurodegenerative disease associated with isolated mitochondrial respiratory chain (MRC) complex III deficiency and loss-of-function mutations in the TT19 gene in the few patients reported so far.
Mutations in TTC19 have been rarely associated with mitochondrial disease to date, being described in about ten patients with heterogeneous clinical presentations, ranging from early onset encephalomyopathy to adult forms with cerebellar ataxia.
TTC19 has been reported to be a causative gene of a neurodegenerative disease in Italian and Portuguese families and to be involved in the pathogenesis of mitochondrial respiratory chain complex III (cIII) deficiency.
We identified a homozygous nonsense mutation in the gene encoding tetratricopeptide 19 (TTC19) in individuals from two families affected by progressive encephalopathy associated with profound cIII deficiency and accumulation of cIII-specific assembly intermediates.
Recent studies highlight the importance of both traditional and newly recognized interactors of mTOR, such as p70S6K, 4EBP1, GSK-3Beta, REDD1/RTP801, TSC1/TSC2, growth factors, wingless, and forkhead transcription factors, that influence Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, Huntington's disease, tuberous sclerosis, and epilepsy.
JARID2 is down-regulated in B-chronic lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL) and acute monocytic leukemia (AMOL), and knockdown of JARID2 promotes leukemia cell proliferation via acceleration of the G1/S transition.
In addition, we demonstrated that miR-15b degraded SMURF2 and its overexpression promoted EMT in pancreatic cancer, and its expression was associated with metastasis in the disease.
Our results support the use of carnosic acid-rich rosemary extract as a complementary approach in colon and pancreatic cancer and indicate that GCNT3 expression may be involved in its antitumor mechanism and that miR-15b might be used as a non-invasive biomarker to monitor rosemary anticancer effect.
Eight miRNAs were significantly upregulated in most pancreatic cancer tissues and cell lines, including miR-196a, miR-190, miR-186, miR-221, miR-222, miR-200b, miR-15b, and miR-95.
Van den Ende-Gupta Syndrome (VDEGS) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by blepharophimosis, distinctive nose, hypoplastic maxilla, and skeletal abnormalities.
[2010] described a VDEGS patient with sclerocornea and cataracts with compound heterozygosity for the common 22q11.2 microdeletion and a hemizygous SCARF2 mutation.
Because sclerocornea had been described in DiGeorge-velo-cardio-facial syndrome but not in VDEGS, they suggested that the ocular abnormalities were caused by the 22q11.2 microdeletion.
We report on a 23-year-old male who presented with bilateral sclerocornea and the VDGEGS phenotype who was subsequently found to be homozygous for a 17 bp deletion in exon 4 of SCARF2.
The occurrence of bilateral sclerocornea in our patient together with that of Bedeschi et al., suggests that the full VDEGS phenotype may include sclerocornea resulting from homozygosity or compound heterozygosity for loss of function variants in SCARF2.
Van den Ende-Gupta syndrome (VDEGS) is a congenital condition characterized by craniofacial and skeletal manifestations, specifically blepharophimosis, malar and maxillary hypoplasia, distinctive nose, arachnocamptodactyly, and long slender bones of the hands and feet.
Van Den Ende-Gupta syndrome (VDEGS) is an infrequently described disorder characterized by arachnodactyly, camptodactyly, blepharophimosis, malar hypoplasia, narrow nasal bridge, convex nasal ridge, and everted lower lip.
Van Den Ende-Gupta syndrome (VDEGS) is an extremely rare autosomal-recessive disorder characterized by distinctive craniofacial features, which include blepharophimosis, malar and/or maxillary hypoplasia, a narrow and beaked nose, and an everted lower lip.
van den Ende-Gupta syndrome is characterized by craniofacial and skeletal manifestations, mainly malar and/or maxillary hypoplasia, blepharophimosis, distinctive nose, lower lip eversion, arachnodactyly, camptodactyly, and long slender bones of hands and feet.
Here, we report on a Venezuelan child with manifestations of van den Ende-Gupta syndrome, including blepharophimosis, arachnodactyly, and congenital contractures.
This is the fifth report of VDEGS, which is characterized by blepharophimosis, narrow nose with hypoplastic alae nasi, hypoplastic maxilla, everted lower lip, slender and elongated hands and feet, arachnodactyly, self-limiting joint contractures, and distinctive skeletal findings.
It is important to distinguish VDEGS from Marden-Walker syndrome (MWS) since both syndromes include blepharophimosis, arachnodactyly, and congenital contractures.
While, congenital contractures with arachnodactyly are features commonly seen in several other delineated syndromes, such as congenital contractural arachnodactyly (CCA) syndrome, characteristic facial features (blepharophimosis, narrow nose with ocular hypertelorism, prominent ears, and everted lower lip), distinguish VDEGS from other syndromes associated with CCA, including CCA.
We previously observed that mitsugumin 29 (Mg29), an important t-tubule organizing protein in skeletal muscle, was induced in the mouse heart for the first time during dilated cardiomyopathy with heart failure.
CCDDs have been associated with dominant or recessive monogenic mutations in at least 7 different genes (CHN1, SALL4, HOXA1, KIF21A, PHOX2A, TUBB3, ROBO3) that cause phenotypes such as Duane retraction syndrome, congenital fibrosis of the extraocular muscles, and horizontal gaze palsy with progressive scoliosis.
The objective of this study was to investigate whether the genetic polymorphism rs12665607 of ESR1, rs10995190 of ZNF365, rs3817198 of LSP1 and rs17001868 of SGSM3/MKL1 are associated with the development of breast cancer (BC) in the Chinese women.
The objective of the present work was to investigate key genes in ovarian cancer based on mAP-KL method which comprised the maxT multiple hypothesis (m), Krzanowski and Lai (KL) cluster quality index, and affinity propagation (AP) clustering algorithm, and mutual information network (MIN) constructed by the context likelihood of relatedness (CLR) algorithm.
SVM model validated that the classification between normal controls and ovarian cancer patients by mAP-KL had a good performance.
We have obtained three key genes (C9orf16, COX5B and ACTB) for ovarian cancer on the basis of mAP-KL method and MIN analysis.
We selected for evaluation 1327 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) showing the lowest P-values for interaction (P int) in a meta-analysis of genome-wide gene-environment interaction studies with MHT use on risk of breast cancer, 2541 SNPs in candidate genes (AKR1C4, CYP1A1-CYP1A2, CYP1B1, ESR2, PPARG, PRL, SULT1A1-SULT1A2 and TNF) and ten SNPs (AREG-rs10034692, PRDM6-rs186749, ESR1-rs12665607, ZNF365-rs10995190, 8p11.23-rs7816345, LSP1-rs3817198, IGF1-rs703556, 12q24-rs1265507, TMEM184B-rs7289126, and SGSM3-rs17001868) associated with mammographic density in genome-wide studies.
In this study, the expression of miR-663a/miR-423-5p and TNIP2 were compared between human renal biopsy tissues from LN patients and renal cell carcinoma patients.
This study aimed to investigate the effect of miR-423-5p on the sensitivity of glioma stem cells to apigenin and to explore the potential mechanism.
In this study, we found miR-423-5p to be overexpressed in glioma tissues and corresponding glioma stem cells.
Downregulation of miR-423-5p repressed glioma stem cell growth but did not cause apoptosis.
Based on the concept of "Pharmaco-miR," this study further demonstrated that the combination of miR-423-5p knockdown and apigenin had a notable additive effect on inhibiting proliferation and promoting apoptosis in glioma stem cells.
In conclusion, this study indicates that downregulation of miR-423-5p enhances the sensitivity of glioma stem cells to apigenin through the mitochondrial pathway.
Among the top, miR-21-5p, let-7b-5p, let-7a-5p, miR-424-5p, miR-423-5p, miR-21-3p, miR-199b-5p, miR-182-5p, and miR-205-5p were differentially expressed between thin and thick melanomas.
Real-time PCR was used to analyze the expression of microRNA-423-5p (miR-423-5p) in human glioma samples and normal brain tissue.
Western blotting was used to determine the expression of inhibitor of growth 4 (ING-4)in glioma tissues, and a luciferase reporter assay was conducted to confirm whether ING-4 is a direct target of miR-423-5p.
Western blotting was used to identify the potential signaling pathways that are affected in glioma cell growth by miR-423-5p.
Xenograft tumors were examined in vivo for the carcinogenic effects of miR-423-5p in glioma tissues.
We first reported that miR-423-5p expression was increased in gliomas and was a potential tumor promoter via targeting ING-4.
Furthermore, the overexpression of miR-423-5p strengthened glioma cell proliferation, angiogenesis, and invasion.
Finally, miR-423-5p overexpression also strengthened GBM neurosphere formation and rendered glioma cells resistant to temozolomide (TMZ).
This study establishes that miR-423-5p functions as an oncogene in glioma tissues by suppressing ING-4 and suggests that it has therapeutic potential for glioma.
Finally, we discuss the different circulating miRNAs such as miR-21, miR-20a, miR-155, miR-221, miR-210, miR-218, miR-200-family, miR-141, miR-122, miR-486-5p, miR-423-5p, miR-29a, and miR-500 for clinical diagnosis of various cancers.
These effects of n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) on lipid metabolism may be linked to the upregulation of Fra1 and attenuated activity of c-Jun and c-Fos, thus ultimately reducing the severity of the lipid metabolism disorder and liver damage to some extent.
Data were analysed from the Fabry Outcome Survey (FOS; Shire; extracted August 2013) for "index patients", defined as the first patient diagnosed with Fabry disease from a family with several or no additional members registered in FOS.
After TI, the number of c-Fos-ir increased in the caudal and intermediate areas of the ICo (but not in the GCt), throughout the rostrocaudal axis of the dorsal stratum griseum periventriculare (SGPd) of the optic tectum and in the n. mesencephalicus lateralis pars dorsalis (MLd), which is part of the ascending auditory pathway.
To evaluate the utility of magnetic resonance (MR) cisternography using 3-dimensional (3D) fast asymmetric spin-echo (FASE) sequences with multiplanar reconstruction (MPR) for detection of the sites of neurovascular compression (NVC) in patients with trigeminal neuralgia.
The technique of MR cisternography using 3D-FASE sequences with MPR is more accurate and useful than MRA for detection of the site of NVC in patients with trigeminal neuralgia.
To evaluate three-dimensional (3D) constructive interference in steady-state (CISS) magnetic resonance (MR) imaging and MR angiography with multiplanar reconstruction (MPR) for detection of neurovascular compression (NVC) in patients with trigeminal neuralgia and to evaluate the relationship between clinical symptoms related to trigeminal branches and those related to the site of trigeminal nerve compression.
3D CISS MR imaging with MPR is useful in the detection of NVC in patients with trigeminal neuralgia, compared with MR angiography.
A new technique, simultaneous display of magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) and multiplanar reconstruction (MPR), was performed by a workstation to identify the involved vessels in patients with trigeminal neuralgia (TN) or hemifacial spasm (HFS), and the results were compared with those of oblique sagittal MRI technique.
Recently, CRTC1-MAML2 fusion gene was reported in hidradenomas, with the fusion transcript being demonstrated in approximately 50% of cases.
We conclude that CRTC1/3-MAML2 fusion gene analysis can be a useful method for diagnosing hidradenoma.
Twenty-one hidradenomas from 20 patients (13 female, 7 male) ranging in age from 18 to 87years (mean, 57.75years; median, 60years) were studied for CRTC1-MAML2 and CRTC3-MAML2 fusions to find out whether there is a correlation between the particular cell type (polyhedral eosinophilic, clear, mucinous, epidermoid, and oncocytic) and presence the above alterations.
MLL-MAML2 in secondary AML/MDS and MECT1-MAML2 in mucoepithelioid carcinoma, benign Wartin's tumor, and clear cell hidradenoma consist of the same COOH-terminal part of MAML2.
RT-PCR analysis of a clear cell hidradenoma with a t(11;19)(q21;p13) translocation revealed expression of a TORC1-MAML2 fusion transcript consisting of exon 1 of TORC1 fused to exons 2-5 of MAML2.
PI3KGamma has emerged as a promising target for the treatment of obesity and insulin resistance; however, previous studies have indicated that PI3KGamma activity in pancreatic Beta-cells is required for normal insulin secretion in response to glucose.
To address this issue, we investigated the effects of PI3KGamma ablation in db/db diabetic mice, a genetic model of obesity-driven Beta-cell failure and diabetes.
Our results are consistent with the concept that the beneficial action of PI3KGamma ablation in obesity-driven glucose intolerance is largely a result of its leptin-dependent effects on adiposity and, to a lesser extent, the promotion of adipose tissue neutrophil recruitment and M1 polarization of gene expression.
PI3KGamma plays an important role in diet-induced obesity and insulin resistance.
Since subclinical inflammation is a hallmark of atherosclerosis, obesity-related insulin resistance, and pancreatic Beta-cell failure, we asked whether common genetic variation in the PI3KGamma gene (PIK3CG) contributes to body fat content/distribution, serum adipokine/cytokine concentrations, alterations in plasma lipid profiles, insulin sensitivity, insulin release, and glucose homeostasis.
This study provides estimates for the prevalence of DSM-5 EDs in adolescents, further support for their impact on mental health, and new evidence for an association between bulimic disorders and obesity.
These results suggest that combined inhibition of PI3KBeta and PI3KGamma might represent a promising treatment for obesity.
Furthermore, loss of miR-103 causes strong upregulation of the PI3K-Akt-mTOR pathway in vitro and its application into the ARC of the Dicer-deficient mice both reverses upregulation of Pik3cg, the mRNA encoding the catalytic subunit p110Gamma of the PI3K complex, and attenuates the hyperphagic obesity.
Ribosomal protein S6 kinase 1 (S6K1) is a serine/threonine protein kinase that plays an important role in the PIK3/mTOR signaling pathway, and is implicated in diseases including diabetes, obesity, and cancer.
These results illustrate the impact of TRPC3 on LV compliance and flexibility and, focusing on the TRPC3-Nox2 complex, provide a strategy for prevention of doxorubicin-induced cardiomyopathy.
We conclude that inhibition of TRPC3 channels contributes to H-R-induced suppression of KCa channel activity, which serves as a mechanism underlying coronary endothelial dysfunction in ischemia-reperfusion (I-R) injury and renders TRPC3 a potential target for endothelial protection in I-R conditions.
However, it remains elusive whether mitochondrial TRPC3 participates in hypertension by increasing mitochondrial calcium handling and ROS production.
More importantly, TRPC3 knockout mice exhibited significantly ameliorated hypertension through reduction of angiotensin II-induced mitochondrial ROS generation.
Working in vitro with H9c2 cardiomyoblasts subjected to 9-h hypoxia followed by 6-h reoxygenation (H/R), and analyzing changes occurring in areas-at-risk (AARs) of murine hearts subjected to a 30-min ischemia followed by 24-h reperfusion (I/R) protocol, we found: (i) that blocking TRPC with SKF96365 significantly ameliorated damage induced by H/R, including development of the mitochondrial permeability transition and proapoptotic changes in Bcl2/BAX ratios; and (ii) that AAR tissues had increased TUNEL+ cells, augmented Bcl2/BAX ratios, and increased p(S240)NFATc3, p(S473)AKT, p(S9)GSK3Beta, and TRPC3 and -6 proteins, consistent with activation of a positive-feedback loop in which calcium entering through TRPCs activates calcineurin-mediated NFATc3-directed transcription of TRPC genes, leading to more Ca2+ entry.
Conflicting information exists regarding changes in TRPC3/TRPC6 functional expression in hypertension.
The expression profiles and biological relevance of long non-coding RNA XIST and its activator JPX in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) are not well elucidated.
Interestingly, decreased Xist expression in breast cancer samples was associated with reduced levels of Jpx RNA, an lncRNA that positively regulates Xist promoter activity.
ME-143 (NV-143), a synthetic isoflavone under clinical evaluation for efficacy in the management of ovarian and other forms of human cancer, blocked the activity of a cancer-specific and growth-related cell surface ECTO-NOX protein with both oxidative (hydroquinone) and protein disulfide-thiol interchange activity designated ENOX2 (tNOX) and inhibited the growth of cultured cancer cells with EC50s in the range of 20-50 nM.
Activities of constitutive ENOX1 (CNOX) forms of either cancer or noncancer cells were unaffected by ME-143 over the range of concentrations inhibiting ENOX2.
Taken together, the findings show that ME-143 binds to ENOX2 with an affinity 4 to 10 times greater than that reported previously for the related anticancer isoflavone, phenoxodiol.
Functional motifs previously identified by site-directed mutagenesis in a cancer-associated ENOX (tNOX or ENOX2) as adenine nucleotide or copper binding along with essential cysteines are present, but the drug-binding motif (EEMTE) sequence of ENOX2 is absent.
In order to further elucidate the biological properties of the NU-T2-BMZ antigen, we investigated the expression of NU-T2-BMZ antigen and type VII collagen (well identified component of anchoring fibrils) in various skin tumors such as basal cell epithelioma (BCE), squamous cell carcinoma, Bowen's disease, actinic keratosis and seborrheic keratosis.
Principal component analysis (PCA) in allogeneic cultures of ESRDP identified two correlation clusters, one consisting of sCD30, the Th-1 cytokine IFN-Gamma, MIP-1Alfa, RANTES, sIL-2RAlfa, MIP-1Beta, TNF-Beta, MDC, GM-CSF and IL-5, and another one consisting of CD30 and t-bet transcripts, IL-13 and proinflammatory proteins IP-10, IL-8, IL-1RAlfa and MCP-1.
We previously showed that loss of tauCstF-64 causes male infertility because of major defects in mouse spermatogenesis.
Here we show that targeted disruption of Cstf2t in mice causes aberrant spermatogenesis, specifically disrupting meiotic and postmeiotic development, resulting in male infertility resembling oligoasthenoteratozoospermia.
Our results indicate that, although the infertility in Cstf2t(-/-) males is due to low sperm count, multiple genes controlling many aspects of germ-cell development depend on tauCstF-64 for their normal expression.
Radiation hybrid mapping places the human tauCstF-64 gene at 10q22-q23, which is the site of a translocation that has been associated with human neurological problems and male infertility.
In cervical cancer cells, KpnBeta1 downregulation results in sustained degradation of the antiapoptotic protein, Mcl-1, and elevated Noxa expression, as well as mitochondrial membrane permeabilization resulting in the release of cytochrome C and activation of associated caspases.
Therefore, we have revealed that the modulation of the Mcl-1/Noxa axis by platinum compounds results in a strong sensitization of chemoresistant ovarian carcinoma cells to ABT-737, which could constitute a promising therapeutic in these cancers.
In this study, we found that genetic variants of Bcl-2 proteins exist among cisplatin-sensitive and -resistant ovarian cancer cells, and the responses of NOXA and Bax to cisplatin are regulated mainly by p53.
To our knowledge, these data suggest a new mechanism by which NOXA chemosensitized ovarian cancer cells to cisplatin by inducing alterations in the Bax/Smac axis.
Taken together, our findings show that NOXA is potentially useful as a chemosensitizer in ovarian cancer therapy.
Experiments were carried out to investigate whether Noxa could, therefore, enhance the cytotoxic effect of gemcitabine in human ovarian cancer cell lines (A2780 and COC1).
Our data suggest that Noxa exhibited potent proapoptotic activity against human ovarian cancer cells, and the combination of Noxa and gemcitabine showed a more significant cytotoxic effect against ovarian cancer cells in comparison with either of these agents alone.
To our knowledge, we have provided the first evidence that Noxa can enhance therapeutic responses of ovarian cancer cells to gemcitabine, and that it could be potentially useful as a chemosensitizer in ovarian cancer therapy.
Tandem mass analysis and renal biopsy also indicated that the patient had methylmalonic acidemia (MMA) and thrombotic microangiopathy combined with focal renal cortical necrosis.
The positive expression rates and expression levels of mRNA of FOXC2, N-cadherin, VEGF, SDF-1, Notch and LYVE-1 in cervical cancer were significantly higher than those in CIN, and those in the inflammatory tissues were the lowest, while the positive expression rate of E-cadherin in cervical cancer was lower than that in CIN, and that in the inflammatory tissues was the highest (P&lt;0.05).
The positive expression rates of FOXC2, N-cadherin, VEGF, SDF-1, Notch and LYVE-1 in patients with cervical cancer [human papillomavirus (HPV) positive, squamous cell carcinoma, Stages III-IV, maximal diameter &gt;=3.8 cm and low differentiation] were increased, and the positive expression rate of E-cadherin was decreased (P&lt;0.05).
In this study, using the antioxidant N-acetylcysteine (NAC), we show that hypoxia-induced reactive oxygen species (ROS) in MDA-MB-468 breast cancer cells, selectively regulate hypoxia-induced increases in N-cadherin and SERPINE1, two proteins involved in cell adhesion.
Results of the present study demonstrated that CEACAM1-4S suppresses breast cancer cell invasion and migration in a manner that is dependent on the balance between matrix metalloproteinase 2/tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase 2 and E-/N-cadherin expression.
Here we established a doxorubicin-resistant breast cancer cell line MCF-7/Adr, and found these cells exhibited an EMT phenotype featured by a fibroblast-like morphology, increased the capacity of migration and invasion, and underwent the changes of molecular markers of EMT including E-cadherin, N-cadherin, and vimentin.
In MRL.lpr/lpr mice, which were used to examine disease manifestations, AdTACI reduced the extent of glomerulonephritis and proteinuria and improved survival, but had little effect on T cell infiltration and interstitial nephritis.
In patients with symptomatic pregnancy hydronephrosis, the likelihood of surgical treatment for CRP levels, WBC counts and VAS is high.
On univariate Cox analysis, clinical T stage, histology of transurethral resection of bladder tumor (TURBT) specimen, pretreatment hemoglobin, pretreatment neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio (NLR), pretreatment serum C-reactive protein level, pretreatment serum albumin level, presence of hydronephrosis, and presence of sarcopenia were associated with significantly worse CSS.
Stone size, previous spontaneous passage, hydronephrosis, serum C-reactive protein and white blood count can be used to predict spontaneous stone passage in patients with 4 to 10 mm distal ureteral stones.
Clinicians should have high index of suspicion for retroperitoneal fibrosis when patients present with an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) or C-reactive protein (CRP) and renal insufficiency from obstructive uropathy.
Germ line deletion of 14-3-3Epsilon led to malalignment of both the outflow tract (OFT) and atrioventricular (AV) cushions, with resulting tricuspid stenosis and atresia, mitral valve abnormalities, and perimembranous ventricular septal defects (VSDs).
These data suggest that 14-3-3Epsilon, in addition to left ventricular non-compaction (LVNC), might be linked to different forms of congenital heart disease (CHD).
Previous reports show that defects in TAZ, SCN5A, TPM1, YWHAE, MYH7, ACTC1 and TNNT2 are associated with LVNC.
It has been previously shown that LVNC is associated with defects in TAZ, DNTA, LDB3, YWHAE, MIB1, PRDM16, and sarcomeric genes.
Therefore, we hypothesized that variants in YWHAE may contribute to the pathophysiology of LVNC in humans.
In 77 Japanese patients with LVNC, including the probands of 29 families, mutation analysis of YWHAE by direct DNA sequencing identified 7 novel variants.
One of them, c.-458G&gt;T, in the YWHAE promoter, was identified in a familial patient with LVNC and hypoplasia of the corpus callosum.
These data suggest that the -458G&gt;T YWHAE variant contributes to the abnormal myocardial morphogenesis characteristic of LVNC as well as abnormal brain development, and implicate YWHAE as a novel candidate gene in pediatric cardiomyopathies.
14-3-3Epsilon deletion did not appear to induce compensation by other 14-3-3 isoforms but led to ventricular noncompaction, with features similar to LVNC, resulting from a selective reduction in compact myocardium thickness.
These data are consistent with the long-held view that human LVNC may result from compaction arrest, and they implicate 14-3-3Epsilon as a new candidate gene in congenital human cardiomyopathies.
In LQT2 families, we identified three novel heterozygous HERG mutations (G965X, R1014PfsX39, V1038AfsX21) in the C-terminus that led to protein truncation and loss of a PKA phosphorylation site required for binding of 14-3-3epsilon.
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is an incurable complex genetic disorder that is associated with sequence changes in 7 genes (MUC5B, TERT, TERC, RTEL1, PARN, SFTPC, and SFTPA2) and with variants in at least 11 novel loci.
The differential responses of alveolar macrophages to SP-A1 and SP-A2 highlight the importance of genotype in immune regulation and the susceptibility to lung disease and the need for development of individualized treatment options.
Most of the individuals of the control group and influenza patients are carries of alleles and genotypes rs1965708 and rs1059046 of SFTPA2 gene, rs1130866 of SFTPB gene, that have, based on scientific literature data, shown association with severe course of influenza A(H1N1) pdm09 and other inflammatory diseases of the respiratory tract.
Generally, significant differences in frequency of occurrence of unfavorable genotypes CC rs1965708, AA rs1059046 of SFTPA2 gene and CC rs1130866 of SFTPB gene in influenza patients in comparison with individuals of the control group were not detected, that gives evidence on a high (from 19 to 51%) prevalence of these genotypes in the studied population.
Allele C and genotype CC rs1965708 of SFTPA2 gene, allele A and genotype AA rs1059046 of SFTPA2 gene, allele C and genotype CC rs1130866 of SFTPB gene did not shown an association with severe course of A(H1N1) pdm09 influenza.
DEGs, including JUN, tumor necrosis factor (TNF), Ras homolog family member B (RHOB) and transforming growth factor Beta2 (TGFBeta2) were significantly enriched in the signaling pathway of renal cell carcinoma.
In a mouse model of B16F10 melanoma, Trp2/PHM10/CpG showed significantly higher antigen-specific cytotoxic T lymphocyte activity and greater anticancer efficacy than Trp2/PHM0/CpG without PCL-PEI or a mixture of free Trp2 and CpG.
They also suggest that PHMs can serve as a structurally simple and highly tunable platform for co-delivery of antigen and adjuvant in cancer immunotherapy.
Hydatidiform moles (HM), presenting as complete (CHM) and partial (PHM) form, are rare pregnancy disorder.
In the CHM group, 9 (75%) input diagnoses were mola in obs, and 3 (25%) of them were signed as abortion, unlike the PHM where 126 (67%) were qualified as abortion, 35 (19%) as blighted ovum, and 26 (14%) were suggestive for molar pregnancy.
Sinusitis and skin infections are the most common presentation of subcutaneous PHM caused by the fungus Bipolaris spicifera.
The present study documents a case of subcutaneous PHM caused by infection with Bipolaris spicifera in a 56-year-old Chinese man, who presented with plaque papillomatosis on the left foot.
The objectives of this study were to describe the distribution of brain metastases (BM) in breast cancer patients and investigate the risk factors for perihippocampal metastases (PHM).
Breast cancer subtype (BCS) was not associated with PHM.
Our study suggests that a low incidence of PHM may be acceptable to perform hippocampal-sparing whole-brain radiation therapy for breast cancer patients.
To evaluate the agreement of multichannel intraluminal impedance-pH monitoring (MII-pHM) and gastroesophageal reflux scintigraphy (GES) for the diagnosis of gastroesophageal reflux disease.
Seventy-five consecutive patients with suspected gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) underwent 24-h combined MII-pHM recording and one hour radionuclide scintigraphy during the course of the MII-pHM study.
According to diagnostic criteria, GERD was diagnosed in 34 (57.7%), 44 (73.3%), 47 (78.3%) and 51 (85%) patients by means of pHM, MII, GES and MII-pHM, respectively.
To determine the prevalence of high myopia (HM), progressive high (degenerative) myopia (PHM), and myopic choroidal neovascularization (mCNV) in the United States.
Streptavidin-peroxidase immunohistochemistry was used to detect the expression of OPN, p2lras, and CD44V6 in tissue samples from 96 breast cancer patients, and the multivariate Cox proportional hazards model (mCOX-PHM) was used to analyze the factors that affect prognosis.
To analyze the prognostic value of the polymorphisms of the thrombophilic genes: plasminogen activator inhibitor type 1 (PAI-1) (-675 4G/5G), factor XIII (FXIII) (G485T), fibrinogen (FBG) (G(-455)A), glycoprotein Ia (GPIa) (C807T), glycoprotein IIIa (GPIIIa) (T106C), and p22phox (C242T), as well as protein genes involved in the pathogenesis of endothelial dysfunction: subunits of p22phox NADH-oxidase (p22phox) (C242T), endothelial NO-synthase (eNOS) (G894T), and methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) (C677T) for the development of antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) and a type of progressive lupous nephritis (LN) in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).
In HR-/HER2+ breast cancer, four genes (three i-genes BTN3A2, CD2, and TRBC1 and the p-gene MMP11) were significantly associated with distant metastasis-free survival (DMFS).
A new prognostic model for HR-/HER2+ breast cancer based on the expression of MMP11 and CD2 was developed and the DMFS for patients in the high-risk group according to our model was significantly lower than that for those in the low-risk group.
NK cells isolated from the peritoneal environment of ovarian cancer patients, known to be impaired in mediating ADCC, bind to huKS-IL2 via CD25.
In the present investigation, comprising 204 untreated breast cancer patients, we showed that the proportion of the total T-cell population (CD2 and CD3 positive cells) and the proportion of helper/inducer T-cells (CD4 positive) was positively linked to spread of cancer cells to axillary nodes which in turn Was strongly correlated to prognosis.
Five FCD causal genes [solute carrier family 4, sodium borate transporter, member 11 (SLC4A11), zinc finger E-box binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1), lipoxygenase homology domains 1 (LOXHD1), collagen, type VIII, alpha 2 (COL8A2) and transcription factor 4 (TCF4)], previously reported to be implicated in the pathogenesis of FCD, were screened.
A total of 27 variants [including 22 known single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) from the Single Nucleotide Polymorphism Database (dbSNP) and 5 variants absent from dbSNP] were detected in this FCD pedigree across the SLC4A11, ZEB1, LOXHD1 and COL8A2 genes as follows: i) 22 known SNPs from dbSNP, including 3 coding (p.R161R, p.S213S and p.T833T) and 11 non-coding variants of SLC4A11, 2 intronic SNPs of ZEB1 from dbSNP (rs220057 and rs220060), 1 intronic SNP of LOXHD1 from dbSNP (rs16939650), and 5 SNPs of COL8A2 from dbSNP (p.A35A, p.R155Q, p.L335L, p.G495G and p.T502M); and ii) 5 variants that have not been previously reported in FCD patients and that are absent from dbSNP were identified across the ZEB1 and LOXHD1 genes; these included 3 continuous indels located at the junction of the 5'-UTR and the adjacent exon 1 of ZEB1 [Indel 1 (c.-86_-53delins gggaggggtggaggcggaggggtGGGGGGGAAGG); Indel 2 (c.-52_-46delinsGGGAGGG); and Indel 3 (c.-45_-42delinsAGGG)], and 2 intronic variants of LOXHD1 (c.5332-126C&gt;T and c.1809+155G&gt;A).
Sequencing of the coding exons of TCF4 and LOXHD1 in six patients showed no variant described with FECD.
FECD is associated with mutations of a variety of unrelated genes: SLC4A11, COL8A2, TCF8, and LOXHD1.
Corneal sections of the original proband were stained for LOXHD1 and demonstrated a distinct increase in antibody punctate staining in the endothelium and Descemet membrane; punctate staining was absent from both normal corneas and FCD corneas negative for causal LOXHD1 mutations.
All together, our data implicate rare alleles in LOXHD1 in the pathogenesis of FCD and highlight how different mutations in the same locus can potentially produce diverse phenotypes.
However, the potential biological roles and regulatory mechanisms of CCAT1 in intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (ICC) remain unclear.
To investigate the expression of long noncoding RNA CCAT1 in cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) and to assess the CCAT1 expression as a prognostic biomarker for CCA.
Our study showed that lncRNA CCAT1, which was upregulated and associated with aggressive malignant behavior, may serve as a novel prognostic biomarker and potential therapeutic target for cholangiocarcinoma.
Inner-ear hair cell differentiation requires Atoh1 function, while Eya1, Six1, and Sox2 are coexpressed in sensory progenitors and mutations in these genes cause sensorineural hearing loss.
Mutation in SIX1 is responsible also for DFNA23, a locus for non-syndromic HI.
The results suggest that decreased NPY expression in the extended amygdala might be causally linked with the depression induced following type 2 diabetes and that the antidepressant action of imipramine in diabetic mice might be mediated by NPY-NPY Y1 receptor system.
Numerous models of obesity and diabetes are characterized by increased central nervous system (CNS) neuropeptide Y (NPY); in fact, a single intracerebroventricular (icv) administration of NPY in lean fasted rats elevates hepatic VLDL-TG secretion and does so, in large part, via signaling through the CNS NPY Y1 receptor.
All 41 human homologs of the mutated genes were mutated in the clinical samples, and some mutations were associated with clinical outcomes, suggesting a high probability of cancer driver genes in the spontaneous tumors of the mouse model.
In the present study, the expression of ICAT in 41 human cervical cancer tissues and 30 normal cervical tissues was evaluated by immunohistochemical analysis.
The erythrocyte protein band 4.1-like5 (EPB4.1L5) regulates E-cadherin in cancer invasion and metastasis inducing epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition.
To detect the expression of protein 4.1 family members in mouse melanoma cell lines and evaluate their effect on cell proliferation.
The expression plasmid vector pEGFP-N1-EPB41L3 carrying 4.1B gene sequence amplified from genomic RNA of mouse embryo fibroblasts was constructed and transiently transfected into mouse melanoma cells.
The eukaryotic expression vector carrying EPB41L3 sequence is capable of inhibiting the proliferation of mouse melanoma B16 and B16-F10 cells.
The aim of this study was to examine the association between T309G (rs2279744) and 40-bp Insertion/deletion (rs3730485) polymorphisms of the MDM2 gene and risk of uterine leiomyoma (UL).
In addition, it is demonstrated that AlfavBeta3 is coexpressed with synaptophysin, a biomarker for aggressive neuroendocrine prostate cancer.
Neurological diseases that exhibit parkinsonism and have normal dopaminergic cells in the nigrostriatal system (e.g., essential tremor, psychogenic parkinsonism, DOPA-responsive dystonia, vascular parkinsonism, drug-induced parkinsonism, manganism, brain tumor, myoclonus-dystonia (DYT11), and fragile X syndrome) might be diagnosed with SWEDDs.
In this study, the efficacy of the MS pyrosequencing method at H19-DMR and LIT1-DMR at 11p15 and SGCE-DMR at 7q21 was evaluated for the genetic diagnosis of BWS (n=18) and SRS (n=20) patients.
Raldh3 knockout notably causes choanal atresia (CA), which is responsible for respiratory distress and death of Raldh3-null mutants at birth.
Treg cells (CD4+CD25+CD127(low) ) and Teff cells (CD4+CD25-) were isolated from peripheral blood and synovial fluid obtained from JIA patients, healthy controls, and children with Lyme arthritis.
The study aims to investigate the frequency of CD4(+)CD25(+)Foxp3(+)CD127(-) T regulatory cells (Tregs) and the expression of CCR4, CCR6 and/or other chemokine receptors on Tregs in peripheral blood (PB) in patients with rheumatoid arthritis, as well as in PB, draining lymph nodes (dLNs), lungs and spleens in collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) mice.
Implications of assessing the proximal and far para-tracheal or sub-carinal nodes (para-tracheal [PTN] or sub-carinal [SCN]) associated with lower primary esophageal carcinomas (ECs) are unclear.
Pleiotrophin (PTN) is a secreted cytokine that is expressed in various cancer cell lines and human tumor such as colon cancer, lung cancer, gastric cancer and melanoma.
Immunohistochemical expression of Cx43 was analyzed in 50 colorectal adenocarcinomas from surgically-treated patients of stage pT3N1-2 without metastases (M0) and 50 specimens of the same pTN stage from patients with synchronous liver metastases (M1).
Data were collected on the preoperative cTN stage according to the radiologist and postoperative pTN stage according to the pathologist on all patients operated on for colon cancer in Sweden 2007-2010.
To our knowledge, this is the first study to demonstrate the utility of PTN as a surrogate marker of outcome in antiangiogenic therapy for metastatic colorectal cancer.
To determine the roles of MBD2 and DNA methylation in human Epsilon-globin gene silencing, transgenic mice containing all sequences extending from the 5' hypersensitive site 5 (HS5) of the Beta-globin locus LCR to the human Gamma-globin gene promoter were generated.
In the LTR-HS5-epsilonp-GFP plasmid integrated into K562 cells, mutation of the CCAAT motif in the LTR enhancer to abolish NF-Y binding inactivated the enhancer, closed down the chromatin structure of the epsilon-globin promoter, and silenced transcription of the green fluorescent protein gene.
Curiously, we also observed an attenuating activity in HS5 that was specific to the epsilon-globin gene at the primitive stage and was independent of the HS5 CTCF binding site.
The LTR enhancer initiates synthesis of long RNAs from the LTR promoter through the intervening HS5 site into the epsilon-globin promoter and the GFP gene.
However, reversing the orientation of the LTR in plasmid (LTR)rev-HS5-epsilonp-GFP, thus reversing the direction of synthesis of LTR RNAs in the antisense direction away from the epsilon-globin promoter and GFP gene drastically reduces the level of GFP mRNA and thus LTR enhancer function.
The roles of each DNase hypersensitive site (HS), and the DNA sequences between them, in the activity of the locus control region of the mammalian beta-globin gene domain were examined by placing human and rabbit restriction fragments containing the cores of HS2, HS3, HS4, and HS5, along with varying amounts of flanking DNA, upstream of a hybrid epsilon-globin-luciferase reporter gene and testing for effects on expression both prior to and after integration into the chromosomes of K562 cells, a human erythroid cell line.
CUZD1 was also elevated in breast and lung cancer specimens and not in colorectal, prostate and testicular cancer specimens.
We validated my-cisTarget by re-analyzing the TAL1 and LMO1 enhancer mutations in T-ALL, and the TERT promoter mutation in melanoma.
SIL-TAL1 rearrangement is common in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL).
Their MRD were evaluated by SIL-TAL1, Wilms' tumor 1 (WT1) expression, and the leukemia-associated immunophenotype (LAIP) .
In this vein, overexpression of TAL1s stimulates the transcription of Beta-hemoglobin in human leukemia K562 cells and promotes erythroid differentiation of human cord blood CD34+ cells cultured in erythropoietin-containing medium.
SCL/TAL1 (stem cell leukemia/T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia [T-ALL] 1) is an essential transcription factor in normal and malignant hematopoiesis.
Gene expression analysis revealed that four of the five genes, HOXA9, TAL1, ATP8A2, ENG and SPARCL1, each harboring one of the five frequently hypermethylated CpG sites within its promoters, were also frequently down-regulated in lung adenocarcinoma.
We investigated the ability of microRNA-93 (miR-93) to influence proliferation, invasion, migration, and apoptosisofrenal cell carcinoma (RCC) cells via transforming growth factor-Beta/solvated metal atom dispersed (TGF-Beta/Smad) signaling by targeting runt-related transcription factor 3 (RUNX3).
There were significant differences in the methylation status of p14ARF, RUNX3, RARBeta, DAPK, and HPP1 between the healthy control, glandular cystitis, and bladder cancer groups (p = 0.027, p &lt; 0.001, p &lt; 0.001, p = 0.030 and p = 0.003, respectively).
Based on the results of this study we recommend the RUNX3 and RARBeta panel as the first choice for bladder cancer detection.
Promoter hypermethylation of a tumor suppressor gene, runt-related transcription factor 3 (RUNX3), may also be associated with bladder cancer genesis.
In this study, we investigated changes of DNA methylation in LINE-1 and RUNX3 promoter in a bladder cancer cell (UM-UC-3) under oxidative stress conditions, stimulated by challenge with H2O2 for 72 h. Cells were pretreated with an antioxidant, tocopheryl acetate for 1 h to attenuate oxidative stress.
In conclusion, hypomethylation of LINE-1 and hypermethylation of RUNX3 promoter in bladder cancer cell line was experimentally induced by reactive oxygen species (ROS).
The RUNX3 tumor suppressor gene promoter was hypomethylated with a significant increase in proportion of the completely unmethylated haplotype after the long-term CSE treatment; whereas RUNX3 promoter hypermethylation was previously reported for bladder cancers of smokers.
However, little is known about the role of RUNX3 in human renal cell carcinoma (RCC).
Two different models of brain ischemia were used to examine the evoked changes in the tyrosine phosphorylation of NMDA receptor subunits 2A and 2B (NR2A and NR2B), as well as their interactions with non-receptor tyrosine kinases (NRTKs: FAK, PYK2 Src), and PSD-95 protein.
Multiple parameters were evaluated including: (1) production of GHB (Gamma-hydroxybutyrate), the biochemical hallmark of SSADHD; (2) rescue from cell death with the dual mTOR (mechanistic target of rapamycin) inhibitor, XL-765, an agent previously shown to rescue aldh5a1-/- mice from premature lethality; (3) mitochondrial number, total reactive oxygen species, and mitochondrial superoxide production, all previously documented as abnormal in aldh5a1-/- mice; (4) total ATP levels and ATP consumption; and (5) selected gene expression profiles associated with epilepsy, a prominent feature in both experimental and human SSADHD.
The human phenotype is that of nonprogressive encephalopathy with prominent bilateral discoloration of the globi pallidi and variable seizures, the latter displayed prominently in Aldh5a1-/- mice with lethal convulsions.
Our findings indicate early GABAergic alterations in Aldh5a1-/- mice, possibly exacerbated by other metabolites, which likely induce a heightened excitatory state that may predispose neural networks to epilepsy in these animals.
Yiqi Chutan Recipe has a certain inhibitory effect on A549 lung cancer in mice and its possible mechanism is relevant to the increase of expression of Caspase-4 and DNA-PK protein.
The mutations were detected in 11 gastric carcinomas (2 caspase-1 and 9 caspase-5 mutations), 6 colorectal carcinomas (2 caspase-4 and 4 caspase-5 mutations), 1 breast carcinoma (1 caspase-5 mutation), and 1 lung carcinoma (1 caspase-5 mutation).
The observations also indicated that DHA downregulated the mRNA and protein expression level of survivin in the lung cancer cell line SPC-A-1 cells, whereas it did not affect those of caspase-4.
Non-parametric multipoint linkage analysis, using the GeneHunter program, provided significant evidence for a novel IGE susceptibility locus on chromosome 3q26 (Z(NPL) = 4.19 at D3S3725; P = 0.000017) and suggestive evidence for two IGE loci on chromosome 14q23 (Z(NPL) = 3.28 at D14S63; P = 0.000566), and chromosome 2q36 (Z(NPL) = 2.98 at D2S1371; P = 0.000535).
A weak trend towards an excess of allele sharing (identity by descent) among family members affected by an IGE was obtained in 26 families of JME patients (Z[NPL] = 1.25 at theta = 0.000, p = 0.057).
Our results, in contrast to those of previous investigations of localization-related epilepsy, which showed an increase in IEDs after NAL administration, suggest a possible difference in the mechanism whereby SD enhances IEDs in IGE and localization-related epilepsy.
The defective activation of pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDHC) in Leigh's disease (subacute necrotizing encephalomyelopathy) could be due to deficiency of pyruvate dehydrogenase phosphate (PDHb) phosphatase (EC 3.1.3.43).
A-07, U-25, D-12, or R-18 melanoma xenografts were grown in dorsal window chambers and given daily treatments of sunitinib (40 mg/kg) or vehicle.
A-07, D-12, R-18, and U-25 human melanoma cells transfected with green fluorescent protein were injected stereotactically into the right cerebral hemisphere of nude mice.
Human melanoma xenografts (D-12, R-18, and U-25) were used as models of melanoma in humans.
Melanoma angiogenesis, lung colonization, and spontaneous pulmonary metastasis were inhibited in mice bearing D-12, U-25, or thrombospondin-1 overexpressing R-18 tumors, which showed high thrombospondin-1 expression and secreted large quantities of thrombospondin-1 into the blood, but not in mice bearing wild-type R-18 tumors, which were negative for thrombospondin-1.
Three melanoma lines (A-07, R-18, and U-25) were included in the study.
Cells from human melanoma lines (A-07, D-12, R-18, and U-25) transplanted to BALB/c nu/nu mice were used as tumor models.
High expression of Ras protein accompanied with high RbAp46 and low RECK expression were detected in 75% (3/4) of the clinical bladder cancer tumor tissues compared to the adjacent normal parts.
In conclusion, our data suggests that miR-182-5p plays an important role as an oncogene by knocking down RECK and Smad4, resulting in activation of the Wnt-beta-catenin signaling pathway in bladder cancer.
Data on RECK in urothelial bladder cancer are lacking and information on EMMPRIN is sparse.
The state of urinary organs was examined in 126 patients when using for an associated radiotherapy of cervical cancer a high-dose-rate pipe apparatus "Agat-B" together with moving distant gamma-therapy.
Under study was the efficacy of three schedules of dose fractionation in intracavitary gamma-therapy in cervical cancer patients treated on the machine "AGAT-B".
Clinical appraisal is made of an associated use of radiotherapy in two groups of cervical cancer patients, subjected to intracavitary irradiation on a high-dose-rate Agat-B apparatus, depending on different dosage at point A.
The results of combined radiotherapy of corpus uteri cancer in 54 patients with Stages I-III of the disease using an Agat-B remote afterloading apparatus were analysed.
Furthermore, we report that the levels of PLK2 are significantly increased in brains of Alzheimer disease and Lewy body disease patients.
We have previously reported that Cezanne could be a prognostic biomarker for survival in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) patients.
Cezanne-1 and IGF1R expressions were evaluated in 103 patients with lung adenocarcinoma using immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis.
Our findings indicated both cezanne-1 and IGF1R expressions were negative independent predictive factors for the prognosis of lung adenocarcinoma, respectively.
To investigate the correlation among OTUD7B and NIK expression and the clinicopathological characteristics in NSCLC patients.
The expression of OTUD7B and NIK were negatively correlated in NSCLC tumor samples (rs=-0.421, P&lt;0.001).
In addition, the high expression of OTUD7B was associated with good prognosis of NSCLC patients (log-rank=6.714, P=0.0096), and a high OTUD7B/low NIK index can predict an even better prognosis (log-rank=11.794, P=0.0006).
Moreover, the multivariate Cox regression analysis showed that OTUD7B rather than NIK is an independent marker of overall survival in NSCLC patients(HR=1.602, 95% CI 1.009-2.544, P=0.046).
OTUD7B and NIK may play important roles in the development of lung cancer.
The combination of OTUD7B and NIK expression may be a good index for predicting the prognosis of NSCLC.
The purpose of this study is to investigate the correlation of Cezanne expression with clinicopathological/prognostic value in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
The correlation between expression of Cezanne and MMP-9, clinicopathological/prognostic value in hepatocellular carcinoma was examined.
Patients who had Cezanne downregulation, in which cancer cells showed high invasiveness, had shorter TTR and poor OS.
sICAM-1 level may reflect endothelial inflammatory reactions, probably harmful, in the liver and may be useful for monitoring morbidity evolution in schistosomiasis mansoni.
In a case-control study based in two areas of Kenya, hepatosplenic schistosomiasis mansoni was shown to be linked with low levels of IL-5 and with correspondingly high IFN-gamma, TNF, and circulating soluble TNF receptor I (sTNFR-I), sTNFR-II, and sICAM-1.
The aim of this study was to evaluate the expression levels of activin BetaA-subunit, myostatin, and MMP14 messenger RNAs (mRNAs) in uterine leiomyomas and the possible correlation of these factors with clinical features of the disease.
Matrix metalloproteinase 14 was highly expressed in uterine leiomyoma and correlated with myostatin and activin A mRNA expression.
Overall, the present findings showed that MMP14 mRNA is highly expressed in uterine leiomyoma, where it correlates with the molecular expression of growth factors and is further increased in cases of intense dysmenorrhea.
A previous study has revealed that miR-29c functions as a tumor suppressor in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), but the clinical significance and prognostic value of miR-29c in HCC have not been investigated.
We identified a miRNA classifier (Cmi) containing seven differentially expressed miRNAs (miR-29a, miR-29c, miR-133a, miR-143, miR-145, miR-192, and miR-505) that could detect hepatocellular carcinoma.
Here, we show that low-dose ionizing radiation (IR) induces miR-29c expression in female mouse liver, while inhibiting its expression in HepG2, a human hepatocellular carcinoma cell line which is used as a model system in this study.
miR-29c expression is downregulated in human hepatocellular carcinoma cells, which is inversely correlated with WIP1 expression.
Finally, fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and immunohistochemical analyses indicate that miR-29c is downregulated in 50.6% of liver carcinoma tissues examined, whereas WIP1 is upregulated in 45.4% of these tissues.
Our results suggest that the IR-responsive miR-29c may function as a tumor suppressor that plays a crucial role in the development of liver carcinoma via targeting WIP1, therefore possibly representing a target molecule for therapeutic intervention for this disease.
Here, we report that miR-29c was significantly downregulated in hepatitis B virus (HBV)-related hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cell lines as well as in clinical tissues compared with their corresponding controls.
Two miRNAs, miR-101, and miR-29c, were shown to be significantly down regulated in human hepatoma tissues and induced over 4-fold in HepG2 cells under TPA treatment.
Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) and replication studies have shown conflicting associations between the NELL1, NCF4, and FAM92B genes and susceptibility for Crohn's disease (CD).
Relative to comparison subjects, CDC42EP4, LIMK1, LIMK2, ARHGDIA, and PAK3 messenger RNA levels were significantly upregulated in subjects with schizophrenia in laminar and cellular samples.
To evaluate the T1rho (T(1rho)) MRI relaxation time in hippocampus in the brain of Alzheimer's disease (AD), mild cognitive impairment (MCI), and control, and to determine whether the T(1rho) shows any significant difference between these cohorts.
Here, we analyzed 4 common single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of C4BPB and 5 SNPs of C4BPA in a group of 556 schizophrenia patients and a matched group of 610 healthy controls to see if the genes C4BPB and C4BPA, which encode C4BP, may confer a susceptibility to schizophrenia.
Comparing the genotype and allele frequencies of those SNPs between cases and controls, we found no association between the C4BPB/C4BPA variants and schizophrenia.
Our results provided preliminary evidence that C4BPB/C4BPA may not confer susceptibility to schizophrenia among Han Chinese.
The serum concentrations of various cytokines (tumor necrosis factor alpha [TNF-Alfa], interleukin-6 [IL-6], and gamma interferon [IFN-Gamma]) and chemokines (IL-8, interferon-inducible protein 10 [IP-10], monocyte chemoattractant protein 1 [MCP-1], macrophage inflammatory protein 1Alfa [MIP-1Alfa], MIP-1Beta, and eotaxin) were measured in 32 TD and 21 JSF patients.
Comparatively higher levels of other cytokines and chemokines (IL-6, IFN-Gamma, IL-8, IP-10, MCP-1, MIP-1Alfa, and MIP-1Beta) were also observed in the acute phase of JSF.
In conclusion, the data presented here indicate that steatohepatitis develops in the absence of leptin, and that TLR4 is integral to the development NASH secondary to hyperphagia.
The aim of this study was to investigate the relationship between IL28B rs12979860 genotype, the level of TNFAlfa activation and the degree of IR in patients with chronic hepatitis C. One hundred and thirty-three nondiabetic genotype 1 HCV-infected patients with biopsy proven noncirrhotic hepatitis C were investigated for IR (using HOMA index), IL28B rs12979860 genotype and fasting circulating levels of soluble receptor 1 of TNFAlfa (sTNFR1) and adipokines: leptin, adiponectin and IL-6.
AAH patients had higher serum resistin and plasmin activation inhibitor-1 levels, while serum leptin was decreased.
La obesidad es uno de los mayores problemas de salud y un factor determinante del padecimiento de enfermedades prevalentes como sindrome metabolico, asma, apnea del sueno, infertilidad y diferentes tipos de cancer.
Several experimental evidences pinpoint the possible role of Activin A (ActA) as a driver of cancer cachexia.
Supporting this hypothesis, we showed recently that human cancer cachexia is associated with high ActA levels.
Moreover, ActA levels were correlated with body weight loss and skeletal muscle density, two prognostic factors in cancer patients.
Our goal was therefore to investigate the value of ActA to predict survival in cancer patients.
Patients with high ActA (&gt;=408 pg/mL) had lower OS than those with low levels, regardless the type of cancer (OS in colorectal cancer, 50% vs. 79%, P &lt; 0.05; and in lung cancer, 27% vs. 67%, P = 0.001).
The multivariable analysis confirmed the prognostic value of ActA independently of tumour stage or inflammatory markers, particularly in lung cancer.
Our study demonstrates that high ActA level is an independent prognosis factor of survival in cancer patients.
Antecedentes: La hipovitaminosis D ha sido asociada con diversas enfermedades cronicas como infecciones, enfermedades autoinmunes, enfermedad pulmonar obstructiva cronica, cancer y asma.
The present study aimed to determine the levels and prognostic significance of Alfa-smooth muscle actin-positive (ASMA+) CAFs, plus HMGB1 and receptor for advanced glycation end products (RAGE) in cancer cells.
The levels of ASMA (hazard ratio, 14.162; P = .010) and tumor cytoplasmic HMGB1 (hazard ratio, 0.221; P = .005) could serve as independent prognostic markers for metastatic relapse in breast cancer patients.
We present for the first time, to the best of our knowledge, the potential clinical implications of the combined assessment of ASMA+ fibroblasts and cytoplasmic HMGB1 in breast cancer.
Immunohistochemical staining showed that the tumor was positive for c-kit and CD34, and negative for a-SMA and S-100, so the tumor was diagnosed as GIST.
However, the role of PTTG1 in bladder cancer (BC) hasn't yet been characterized well.
Chia seeds normalized insulin stimulated GLUT-4 transporter, the abundance of IRS-1 and pAMPK, changed the profile of fatty acid phospholipids, reduced left-ventricle collagen deposition and normalized hypertension and dyslipidemia.
Autoantibodies to Ro/SSA occur in nearly half of the patients with systemic lupus erythematosus and are associated with lymphopenia, photosensitive dermatitis, and pulmonary and renal disease, which suggests that they have an immunopathologic role.
These ANA-negative, Ro(SSA)-positive lupus patients generally demonstrate a prominent widespread photosensitive dermatitis and are frequently initially seen and evaluated by a dermatologist.
Pyrazolo-pyrido-diazepine dione derivatives targeting Nox4 and Nox1 isoforms appear highly promising therapeutics for the treatment of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis.
By clamping the exposed femoral artery, we induced RIC by six 4-min cycles of ischemia and reperfusion.
Six 4-min cycles of ischemia-reperfusion were performed.
Furthermore, ischemic PC induced by either a single episode (one 5 min occlusion) or multiple episodes (six 4 min occlusions) of ischemia produced equivalent reductions in infarct size in A3AR(-/-)and A3AR(+/+)mice.
We examined the promoter methylation status and LOH of the chromosome 3p genes, von Hippel-Lindau disease (VHL), retinoic acid receptor beta (RAR-beta), RAS association domain family 1A (RASSF1A), and fragile histidine triad (FHIT), in 37 samples of cervical squamous cell carcinoma and corresponding noncancerous tissues.
In comparison with the normal mucosa of the non-cancer patients, the following 14 genes displayed no tumor associated changes: breast cancer 1, early onset (BRCA1), cadherin 1, type 1, E-cadherin (epithelial) (CDH1), death-associated protein kinase 1 (DAPK1), DNA (cytosine-5-)-methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1), melanoma antigen, family A, 1 (directs expression of antigen MZ2-E) (MAGEA1), tumor suppressor candidate 3 (N33), cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1A (p21, Cip1) (p21(WAF1)), cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1B (p27, Kip1) (p27(KIP1)), phosphatase and tensin homolog (mutated in multiple advanced cancers 1) (PTEN), retinoic acid receptor, beta (RAR- , Ras association (RalGDS/AF-6) domain family 1 C (RASSF1C), secreted frizzled-related protein 1 (SFRP1), tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase 3 (Sorsby fundus dystrophy, pseudoinflammatory) (TIMP3), and von Hippel-Lindau syndrome (VHL).
We examined the promoter methylation status of von Hippel-Lindau disease (VHL), retinoic acid receptor beta (RAR-beta), RAS association domain family 1A (RASSF1A), and fragile histidine triad (FHIT) genes in 22 esophageal squamous cell carcinoma cell lines and 47 primary tumors and corresponding noncancerous tissues by a methylation-specific PCR.
In this study, we found that lncRNA HOXC cluster antisense RNA 1 (HOXC-AS1) and homeobox C6 (HOXC6) were downregulated in carotid atherosclerosis by performing microarray analysis.
Both, hyperthyroidism (HpT) and hypothyroidism (HypoT) reduced the peak of CIC but increased EC, in spite of improving PICR.
One strategy focused on the probability of incidence only and was based on logistic regression (MRS1); the other strategy accounted for the age at diagnosis of diabetes and was based on Cox regression (MRS2).
MRS2 had a similar performance and was significantly associated with a younger age of onset of type 2 diabetes (Beta = -3.44 years per MRS2 SD in the training population, p = 1.56 x 10(-7); Beta = -4.73 years per MRS2 SD in the validation population, p = 4.04 x 10(-3)).
TACO is characterized by respiratory distress and acute pulmonary edema.
Consistent with this, Tctn3 mutant mice exhibit holoprosencephaly and randomized heart looping and lack the floor plate in the neural tube, the phenotypes similar to those of Tctn1 and Tctn2 mutants.
Similarly, replacement of Tctn3 with Tctn1 or Tctn2 in the Tctn3 gene locus results in reduced ciliogenesis and Hh signaling, holoprosencephaly, and randomized heart looping.
Dejerine-Sottas disease (DSD), also called hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy type III (HMSNIII), is a severe, infantile-onset demyelinating polyneuropathy syndrome that may be associated with point mutations in either the PMP22 gene, PO gene, EGR2 gene or the PRX gene (for the recessive form).
Hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy type Ia (HMSN Ia) is known as a primarily demyelinating peripheral nerve disease.
A 1.4-Mb tandem duplication, including the gene for peripheral myelin protein 22 (PMP22) in chromosome 17p11.2-12 is responsible for 70% of the cases of the demyelinating type 1 of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease or hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy I (CMT1A/HMSN I).
Dejerine-Sottas disease (DSD), also called hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy type III (HMSNIII), is a severe, infantile-onset, demyelinating polyneuropathy syndrome that may be associated with point mutations in either the PMP22 gene or the P0 gene and shares considerable clinical and pathologic features with CMT1.
Mutations in genes encoding the myelin proteins peripheral myelin protein 22, myelin protein zero and connection 32 are associated with hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy type I and II and hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies.
Three genes responsible for hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy type I (HMSNI) or CMT1 have been identified: peripheral myelin protein 22 (PMP22) and myelin protein zero (MPZ) for the autosomal dominant form and connexin 32 (Cx32) for the X-linked dominant variant.
Posthemorrhoidectomy patients usually opt for a spice-free diet due to fear of pain or anal pruritus induced by spices.
Thus, spice-related paradoxic conservatism in stapled hemorrhoidopexy, which involves no open wound, needed to be studied.
A prospective open-ended study (July 2008 to August 2009) investigated consecutive candidates for day-care stapled hemorrhoidopexy randomized by the date of birth method into a controlled group (receiving a spices-free diet) and a study group (receiving a spicy diet) after an ethics and informed consent protocol.
For young patients, especially those with a past hemorrhoidal history, spice or alcohol intake and constipation are risk factors for hemorrhoidal crisis.
This study explores the effect of COL1A2, COL6A3, and THBS2 gene silencing on proliferation, migration, invasion, and apoptosis of gastric cancer cells through the PI3K-Akt signaling pathway.
Expressions of COL1A2, COL6A3, and THBS2 in gastric cancer cells transfected with corresponding silencing sequences were evaluated by RT-qPCR and Western blot.
The positive expression of PI3K, Akt, and p-Akt was higher in gastric cancer tissues compared with adjacent normal tissues, and the mRNA expression of COL1A2, COL6A3, and THBS2 was increased in gastric cancer tissues.
This study demonstrates that COL1A2, COL6A3, and THBS2 gene silencing inhibits gastric cancer cell proliferation, migration, and invasion while promoting apoptosis through the PI3K-Akt signaling pathway.
Methyl-sensitive cut counting analysis (MSCC) showed fold decreases in GBM CpG methylation sites for genes PBK, KIF23, COL6A3, and LOX.
hZTL1 mediates Zn uptake when expressed in Xenopus laevis oocytes and hZIP4 is mutated in most cases of the inherited Zn deficiency disease acrodermatitis enteropathica.
In the univariable Cox analysis, age, hypertension, albumin, phosphorus levels, and combined elevation of NT-proBNP with Gal-3 above the median (hazard ratio [HR] = 3.65, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 1.45-9.21) were associated with outcomes.
In the CRS, galectin-3 was significantly higher with older age, black race, female sex, body mass index, hypertension, diabetes mellitus and kidney disease, and also in those who developed incident stroke.
Thus, in this community-based population, higher plasma galectin-3 levels were associated with an elevated risk of developing incident CKD, particularly among those with hypertension.
These data suggest that Gal-3 could be a potential therapeutic candidate for the prevention of early renal alterations in hypertension.
Some biomarkers play important roles in the endothelial dysfunction of patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH), including nitric oxide (NO), endothelin-1 (ET-1), asymmetric dimethylarginine (ADMA), galectin-3 (Gal-3), B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP), and uric acid (UA).
Subgroup analyses revealed that AMOT P130 protein expression was increased in OSA patients with excessive daytime sleepiness, BIRC3 protein expression was decreased in OSA patients with hypertension, and LGALS3 protein expression was increased in OSA patients with chronic kidney disease.
AMOT and GALIG may constitute an important determinant for the development of hypersomnia and kidney injury, respectively, while BIRC3 may play a protective role in the development of hypertension.
Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) in vitro infection of dermal endothelial cell begins with its binding to host cell surface receptor molecules such as heparan sulfate (HS), integrins (Alfa3Beta1, AlfaVBeta3 and AlfaVBeta5), xCT and EphA2 receptor tyrosine kinase (EphA2R).
Erythropoietin-producing hepatocellular carcinoma A2 (EphA2) is overexpressed in more than 90% of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) but not significantly in normal lung tissue.
The effect in vivo was evaluated in xenograft SCID Beige mouse model of EphA2 positive NSCLC.
Thus, EphA2-specific T-cell immunotherapy may be a promising approach for the treatment of EphA2-positive NSCLC.
Ligand-independent activation of EphA2 receptor kinase promotes cancer metastasis and invasion.
Activating EphA2 receptor tyrosine kinase with small molecule agonist is a novel strategy to treat EphA2 overexpressing cancer.
Soluble EphA2 fragment levels in cancer-patient sera were higher than those in healthy donors (n=50).
These results indicated that specific detection of soluble EphA2 fragment levels in serum could be potentially useful as a biomarker to diagnose pancreatic cancer.
Targeting CD13/ANPEP by a blocking antibody induced apoptosis in both parental A375- and BRAFi-resistant daughter cells as well as in melanoma cells with intrinsic BRAFi resistance and led to dephosphorylation of EPHA2 on S897, previously demonstrated to cause inhibition of the migratory capacity.
We analyzed the surface expression of 3 targetable glioma antigens (HER2, IL13RAlfa2 and EphA2) in 15 primary GBM samples.
PAK6, which is overexpressed in prostate cancer, was recently reported to localize to cell-cell adhesions and to drive epithelial cell colony escape.
In summary, we have identified the miR-23a-PAK6-LIMK1 pathway of prostate cancer metastasis.
The present study analyzed the expression by immunochemistry of the novel markers P21-activated protein kinase 6 (PAK6) and proteasome beta-4 subunit (PSMB4) in men with localized prostate cancer (PC) who were treated with dose-escalation radiotherapy (RT) and androgen deprivation therapy.
p-21 activated 6 (PAK6), first identified as interacting with the androgen receptor (AR), is over-expressed in multiple cancer tissues and has been linked to the progression of prostate cancer, however little is known about PAK6 function in the absence of AR signaling.
We report here that PAK6 is specifically required for carcinoma cell-cell dissociation downstream of hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) for both DU145 prostate cancer and HT29 colon cancer cells.
We used hormone responsive prostate cancer LAPC4 and LNCap cell lines as models to study the signaling events associated with androgen stimulation and PAK6.
Furthermore, androgen-stimulation promoted prostate cancer cell motility and invasion were demonstrated in LNCap cells ectopically expressing PAK6-WT.
Our results demonstrate that androgen-stimulated PAK6 activation is mediated through a direct interaction between AR and PAK6 and PAK6 activation promotes prostate cancer cells motility and invasion.
Our observations suggest that although some level of functional redundancy exists between Pak1 and Pak6 in prostate cancer cells, targeting Pak1 is a potential option for the management of prostate tumor growth, microinvasion, and metastasis.
Interestingly, we found a strong inverse correlation between PAK6 and AR expression in the cytoplasm of prostate cancer cells.
These observations indicate that PAK6 may be important for the maintenance of androgen-induced AR signaling homeostasis and in prostate malignancy, as well as being a possible new therapeutic target for AR-positive and hormone-sensitive prostate cancer.
Our work identifies a key role of the type I interferon/IL-7 axis in the regulation of intratumoral GammaDeltaT17 cell functions and in the development of primary breast tumor growth and metastasis.
In breast cancer (BC), IL-7 promotes growth of tumor cells in culture through the activation of JAK1/3-STAT5 and PI3K/AKT pathways, and expression of IL-7 signaling components was associated with worst prognosis.
Additionally, IL-7 is the primary driver of T and B cell differentiation, maturation, and response (Corfe and Paige, 2012 [4]) and its elevated levels have been associated with poor prognosis in breast cancer.
The data presented here shows the relationship between pre-existing use of insulin secretagogues in women diagnosed with breast cancer and type 2 diabetes mellitus, the GM-CSF, G-CSF and IL-7 cytokine profiles at the time of breast cancer diagnosis, and subsequent cancer outcomes.
DLN lymphocytes were antigen-sensitized with 4T1 mammary carcinoma 10 days prior to harvest, activated with B/I, and expanded in culture for 7 days with either IL-2, IL-21, IL-2/21, IL-7/15, or IL-7/15/21.
Our previous study has confirmed that IL-7Delta5 (an IL-7 variant lacking exon 5) promotes breast cancer growth.
In this study, we investigated the preclinical effects and molecular mechanisms of IL-7Delta5 on EMT and metastasis in human MCF-7 and BT-20 breast cancer cells in vitro and in vivo.
Inhibition of PI3K/Akt pathway by LY294002 reversed the EMT transition in breast cancer cell lines MCF-7 and BT-20 induced by IL-7Delta5.
In addition, IL-7Delta5 enhanced cancer metastasis and shortened survival time, with increased level changes of activated Akt in nude mice with breast cancer.
In conclusion, our findings demonstrate that IL-7Delta5 induces human breast cancer cell lines EMT and metastasis via activation of PI3K/Akt pathway.
Thus, IL-7Delta5 may be a potential target against human breast cancer.
Imaging studies, either CT temporal bones or MRI of the internal auditory canals without gadolinium, and genetic testing, in particular for connexin 26, connexin 30, and Pendred syndrome, are the most useful diagnostic tests.
A heterozygous missense mutation, 31G-&gt;A, in GJB6 gene was detected in all patients in this family, but this mutation was not detected in family members without the clinical manifestations of HED.
The missense mutation 31G-&gt;A in the GJB6 gene may be one of the molecular mechanisms for HED.
Mutations in GJB6, GJB2 and GJA1 are related to HED.
Summarize the clinical feature and analyse the mutation of the GJB6 gene in a large Chinese family with HED.
There are significant differences in the clinical picture of two rare autosomal dominant syndromes: keratitis-ichthyosis-deafness (KID) syndrome and hidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (Clouston syndrome), which are caused by GJB2 and GJB6 mutations, respectively.
KID syndrome is characterized by progressive vascularizing keratitis, ichthyosiform erythrokeratoderma, and neurosensory hearing loss, whereas Clouston syndrome is characterized by nail dystrophy, hypotrichosis, and palmoplantar keratoderma.
The other case presented is that of a family with Clouston syndrome (caused by p.Gly11Arg mutation in GJB6), who are the first reported patients of Polish origin suffering from this disorder.
Distinct mutations in the gap junction protein connexin30 (Cx30) can cause the ectodermal dysplasia Clouston syndrome in humans.
We have generated a new mouse line expressing the Clouston syndrome mutation Cx30A88V under the control of the endogenous Cx30 promoter.
Therefore, we wanted to elucidate if the main cardiac gap junction protein connexin43 (GJA1) is altered in patients with Tetralogy of Fallot or double-outlet right ventricle of Fallot-type (62 patients referred to as Fallot) compared to other cardiac anomalies (21 patients referred to as non-Fallot).
Furthermore, the changes in cell morphology and GJA1-distribution were not due to the heart defect itself but were significantly dependent on age.
This study aimed to investigate the expression of Cx43 and its related miRNAs in patients with tetralogy of Fallot (TOF), and illustrate the potential role of abnormal miRNAs regulation to Cx43 expression in the pathology of TOF.
Although recent findings implicate the major role of GJA1 during cardiac organogenesis, congenital heart defects are infrequently reported in oculodentodigital dysplasia.
Conversely, those patients with type III syndactyly and congenital heart defect should be screened for GJA1 mutations.
The use of proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) to control the syndrome is a cornerstone in the ZES therapy.
Omeprazole is a proton pump inhibition and ranitidine is an H2 histamine receptor antagonist widely used in the treatment of gastroesophageal reflex disease, peptic ulcer disease, Zollinger-Ellison syndrome and as a protector of the gastric mucosae.
Omeprazole is a proton pump inhibition and ranitidine is an H2 histamine receptor antagonist widely used in the treatment of gastroesophageal reflex disease, peptic ulcer disease, Zollinger-Ellison syndrome and as a protector of the gastric mucosae.
Abrupt discontinuation of proton pump therapy can lead to adverse outcomes in patients with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome.
Proton pump inhibitors are widely used in upper gastrointestinal diseases, including gastric and duodenal ulcers, eradication of Helicobacter pylori in combination with antibiotics, gastroesophageal reflux disease, Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, eosinophilic esophagitis, and prevention of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug-induced peptic ulceration.
At the Outpatient Department for Infertility, University of Rome La Sapienza, we investigated the effect of high-activity ACP1 genotype on spermatic parameters in 105 subjects referred to for varicocele.
Gene expression analysis for EPHA2 (EPH receptor A2), EPHB2 (EPH receptor B2), S100A9 (S100 calcium binding protein A9), PBEF(nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase), LILRB2 (leukocyte immunoglobulin-like receptor, subfamily B (with TM and ITIM domains), member 2), PLAUR (plasminogen activator, urokinase receptor), LTB (lymphotoxin beta (TNF superfamily, member 3)), WNT5A (wingless-type MMTV integration site family, member 5A) has been conducted using real-time polymerase chain reaction in specimens affected by psoriasis versus visually intact skin in 18 patients.
Gene expression analysis for EPHA2 (EPH receptor A2), EPHB2 (EPH receptor B2), S100A9 (S100 calcium binding protein A9), PBEF(nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase), LILRB2 (leukocyte immunoglobulin-like receptor, subfamily B (with TM and ITIM domains), member 2), PLAUR (plasminogen activator, urokinase receptor), LTB (lymphotoxin beta (TNF superfamily, member 3)), WNT5A (wingless-type MMTV integration site family, member 5A) has been conducted using real-time polymerase chain reaction in specimens affected by psoriasis versus visually intact skin in 18 patients.
Statistically significant advantage in cognitive response (but not with global impression of change or non-cognitive measures) was seen with rivastigmine treatment at 24 weeks (MMSE change from baseline MD 0.6, 95% CI 0.11 to 1.09, P value 0.02; Vascular Dementia Assessment Scale (VaDAS) change from baseline MD -1.3, 95% CI-2.62 to 0.02, P value 0.05 ).
The genes encode cytoskeletal tropomyosin TM30nm (TPM3), HS1-binding protein Hax-1 (HAX1), RNA-specific adenosine deaminase (ADAR1), the 34/67-kD laminin receptor (LAMRL6), and the 26S proteasome subunit p31 (PSMD8L), as well as five hitherto uncharacterized proteins (NICE-1, NICE-2, NICE-3, NICE-4, and NICE-5).
To explore the role of mitochondrial DNA 5178 C/A (Mt5178) polymorphism of NADH-dehydrogenase subunit 2 (ND2) gene in type-2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) among ethnic Han Chinese through a case-control study.
To investigate whether a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the mitochondrial gene for NADH dehydrogenase 2 (mt-Nd2) can modulate susceptibility to type 1 diabetes in NOD mice.
NOD/ShiLtJ mice conplastic for the alloxan resistant (ALR)/Lt-derived mt-Nd2(a) allele (NOD.mt(ALR)) were created and compared with standard NOD (carrying the mt-Nd2(c) allele) for susceptibility to spontaneous autoimmune diabetes, or to diabetes elicited by reciprocal adoptive splenic leukocyte transfers, as well as by adoptive transfer of diabetogenic T-cell clones.
However, conplastic mice with the mt-Nd2(a) allele exhibited resistance to transfer of diabetes by the CD4(+) T-cell clone BDC 2.5 as well as the CD8(+) AI4 T-cell clones from T-cell receptor transgenic animals.
Conplastic introduction into NOD mice of a variant mt-Nd2 allele alone was not sufficient to prevent spontaneous autoimmune diabetes.
To investigate the association between serum concentrations of placental leucine aminopeptidase (P-LAP) and hypertensive disorders in pregnancy (HDP), gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM), and perinatal mortality.
Few of the substrates of Tankyrases are Telomeric Repeat binding Factor protein (TRF1), Axis Inhibitory protein (AXIN 1&amp;amp;2), Insulin Responsive Amino Peptidase (IRAP), Nuclear Mitotic Apparatus protein (NuMa), that become aberrantly active due to the apparent overexpression of the enzyme during hyper proliferative disease conditions like cancer, fibrosis and metabolic disorders like diabetes.
Pathway analysis indicated that LNPEP was involved in the renin-angiotensin system, which also has a key role in cardiovascular disease and diabetes.
In this study we measured the cell surface IRAP activity and 3-O-[methyl-14C]-D-Glucose uptake in adipocytes isolated from Otsuka Long Evans Tokushima Fatty rats (OLETF), developed as a model of type 2 diabetes mellitus, to evaluate whether the translocation of GLUT4/IRAP vesicles is affected.
In individuals with type 2 diabetes the insulin-stimulated translocation of IRAP to the cell surface of muscle and fat cells is impaired.
Impaired IRAP action may thus play a role in the development of complications in type 2 diabetes.
In complications of diabetes mellitus, the urinary estriol assays were sensitive and reliable indicators of the pregnancy state, whereas in preeclampsia complications, both the serum oxytocinase and urinary estriol assays were of prognostic value.
In primary CFs, isoproterenol increased the phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and the expression levels of both 11Beta-HSD1 and collagen-I; these isoproterenol-attributable effects were inhibited by co-treatment with eplerenone and PD98059, a specific inhibitor of mitogen-activated protein kinase/ERK kinase activity.
Eplerenone inhibited isoproterenol-induced ERK1/2 phosphorylation and expression of 11Beta-HSD1 and collagen-I in primary CFs, as well as the progression of cardiac fibrosis in the left ventricle.
The number of CD68+ Mo/M phi infiltrating in one glomerulus was significantly higher in Henoch-Schoenlein purpura nephritis(HSPN) (p &lt; 0.01) in comparison with that in minimal change nephrotic syndrome(MCNS) (p &lt; 0.01), and a high tendency was found in IgA nephropathy (IgAN), proliferative glomerulonephritis (non-IgAN), focal segmental glomerulosclerosis(FSGS) and membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis (MPGN), respectively.
Renal biopsy specimens from 13 patients with glomerular disease (6 with Alport's syndrome, 5 with focal glomerulosclerosis, 2 with membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis, Type 1) showing interstitial FCs were investigated by histochemical means for neutral lipid (oil red O stain); immunohistochemical means for monocytes/macrophages (CD68), apolipoproteins (Apo) A-I, B, and E, and oxidized low-density lipoprotein (LDL); and by electron microscopic examination.
1-Cys-peroxiredoxin, glutathione transferase and dehydrin were mainly recognized by patients with baker's asthma but not wheat-induced food allergy.
In addition to confirming mutations in known cancer-associated genes (TP53, KRAS, PIK3CA, MET, NOTCH, STK11, and RB1), several novel mutations in additional genes, including RASA1, CDH4, CDH7, LAMB4, SCAF1, and LMTK2, were identified and validated.
However, differential transcription levels were observed for CDH19 and Hs.96900 in head and neck cancer cell lines supporting their putative involvement through down regulation mechanisms in head and neck cancer progression.
Nested PCR (nPCR) with EBV-1 or EBV-2 specific primers was used to detect EBV-1 and EBV-2 in the subgingival samples from 65 chronic periodontitis patients, 65 gingivitis patients and 24 periodontal healthy individuals.
The vitronectin receptor alpha(v)beta(3) has been identified as a promising potential target for the treatment of osteoporosis, diabetic retinopathy and cancer.
Several presentations focused on the role of calreticulin and other ER chaperones in a variety of disease states, including haemophilia, obesity, diabetes, Sjogren's syndrome, Chagas diseases, multiple sclerosis, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, neurological malignancies (especially glioblastoma), haematological malignancies (especially essential thrombocythemia and myelofibrosis), lung adenocarcinoma, renal pathology with emphasis in fibrosis and drug toxicity.
The current study aimed to determine whether stimulation of aromatase by obesity-associated adipokine leptin involves the regulation of the p53-HIF1Alfa/PKM2 axis.
Our previous findings in obesity-resistant BALB/c mice showed that a diet high in saturated animal fat (HFD) promotes mammary tumorigenesis in both DMBA carcinogenesis and Trp53-null transplant models.
Wiedemann-Steiner syndrome (WDSTS) is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by hypertrichosis, intellectual disability, and dysmorphic facial appearances (down-slanted vertically narrow palpebral fissures, wide nasal bridge, broad nasal tip, and thick eyebrows).
Wiedemann-Steiner syndrome (WDSTS) is a very rare genetic disorder characterized by short stature, intellectual disability and distinctive facial appearance.
Here, we showed that in clinically obtained colorectal carcinoma (CRC) specimens, Flt-1, the type 1 receptor for vascular endothelial growth factor A, was significantly upregulated.
Nintedanib is a triple angiokinase inhibitor approved with docetaxel for adenocarcinoma non-small cell lung cancer after first-line chemotherapy (FLT).
In the phase III LUME-Lung 1 study, overall survival (OS) was significantly longer with nintedanib/docetaxel than with placebo/docetaxel in all adenocarcinoma patients and those with time from start of FLT (TSFLT) &lt;9 months.
This study sought to extend analyses from the LUME-Lung 1 study, specifically for adenocarcinoma patients, to explore the impact of clinically relevant characteristics on outcomes such as time to progression after FLT.
Nintedanib/docetaxel demonstrated significant OS benefits in adenocarcinoma patients, which were more pronounced in patients with shorter TSFLT or TEFLT, or with PD as best response to FLT.
The present study aimed to investigate the alteration of MMP-9 and VEGFR-1 expression patterns following treatment with these tyrosine kinase inhibitors in p16-positive and -negative squamous carcinoma cells.
Carcinoma proliferative activity was assessed using accumulation of [methyl-3H]-3'-deoxy-3'-fluorothymidine ([3H]FLT).
We report on a 4-year-old girl with autosomal recessive cutis laxa, type IA, or pulmonary emphysema type (ARCL1A; OMIM #219100), with loose and wrinkled skin, mitral and tricuspid valve prolapse, conjunctivochalasis, obstructed nasolacrimal ducts, hypoplastic maxilla, and early childhood-onset pulmonary emphysema.
FBLN5 and LTBP4 mutations cause a very similar phenotype associated with severe pulmonary emphysema, in the absence of vascular tortuosity or aneurysms.
Preeclampsia was defined by blood pressure &gt;=140/90 mmHg and proteinuria &gt;=3 g/24 h. Serum immune biomarkers included interleukin (IL)-6, IL-6 receptor, IL-4, IL-4 receptor, IL-5, IL-12, IL-2, TNF-Alfa, TNF-Beta, TNF-receptor, IL-1Beta, IL-1Alfa, IL-8, IL-10, IFN-Gamma, IL-18, macrophage migration inhibitory factor, macrophage inflammatory protein, transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-Beta), and RANTES.
Differential MIF concentrations have been correlated with pathological events during pregnancy, such as recurrent miscarriages and severe pre-eclampsia (PE).
To investigate whether single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) of macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) gene -173G/C is associated with severe preeclampsia.
(1) The MIF -173G/C SNP genotype frequencies of GG, CG, and CC were 62.1% (77/124), 30.6% (38/124), 7.3% (9/124), the allelic frequencies of G and C were 77.4% (192/248) and 22.6% (56/248), respectively, in severe preeclampsia patients; the MIF -173G/C SNP genotype frequencies of GG, CG, and CC were 64.4% (103/160), 30.6% (49/160), 5.0% (8/160), the allelic frequencies of G and C were 79.7% (255/320) and 20.3% (65/320), respectively, in the control group.
No significant differences were observed in the genotypes and allele distributions of MIF -173G/C SNP between the severe preeclampsia patients and control group (all P &gt; 0.05).
The present study suggests that the MIF -173G/C SNP is associated with insulin resistance in severe preeclampsia patients.
MIF maternal serum levels are increased in preeclampsia (PE).
To investigate the expression of macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) and CD74, the receptor of MIF, in preeclamptic placenta and its correlation with the pathogenesis of preeclampsia.
Overexpression of MIF and CD74 in the placenta may up-regulate the CRP level in maternal blood, resulting in systemic inflammatory reaction and vascular endothelium damage which may be involved in the pathogenesis of preeclampsia.
Maternal serum concentrations of macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) have recently been reported to be elevated in cases with preeclampsia.
In addition, MIF levels were examined from cases with mild and severe preeclampsia (n=20 per study cohort) and matched normotensive pregnancies (n=20).
Our data suggest that circulatory MIF concentrations are elevated throughout pregnancy, but are not further increased in preeclampsia.
The isozymes hPAD2 and hPAD4 have been implicated in the development and progression of several autoimmune diseases, including rheumatoid arthritis and multiple sclerosis.
Protein arginine deiminase 2 (PAD2) plays a key role in the onset and progression of multiple sclerosis, rheumatoid arthritis, and breast cancer.
Previously, we reported the abnormal accumulation of citrullinated proteins and the increase in the amount of PAD2 in hippocampi from Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients.
The enzyme peptidylarginine deiminase 2 (PAD2) has been associated with inflammatory diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis and neurodegenerative diseases including multiple sclerosis.
To define the association of deimination with the pathogenesis of age-related macular degeneration (AMD), we studied protein deimination and PAD2 levels in retinas of AMD donor eyes compared to age-matched non-AMD retinas.
We therefore examined whether SNPs associated with the steroid-responsive expression of GLCCI1 might predict steroid-responsiveness in nephrotic syndrome.
While larger cohorts are needed to ascertain the possibility of a small effect of GLCCI1 SNPs on the steroid-responsiveness of nephrotic syndrome, the GLCCI1 SNPs associated with steroid-responsiveness in asthmatic patients are unlikely to have a clinically actionable impact in pediatric nephrotic syndrome.
In the previous study, we had showed the expression of CD133+ CD54+ CD44+ cellular subpopulation of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) was significantly associated with liver metastasis of colorectal cancer (CRC).
Liver cancer stem cells are a small subset of undifferentiated liver tumor cells, responsible for cancer initiation, metastasis, relapse and chemoresistance, enriched and isolated according to immunophenotypic and functional properties: cell surface proteins (CD133, CD90, CD44, EpCAM, OV-6, CD13, CD24, DLK1, Alfa2Delta1, ICAM-1 and CD47); the functional markers corresponding to side population, high aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) activity and autofluorescence.
In order to provide clinical guidance for the treatment of CRC, this study is conducted to investigate the correlations of intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1) gene polymorphisms with susceptibility and multidrug resistance (MDR) of colorectal cancer (CRC).
The objective of the present study was to investigate the effects of remifentanil on hemodynamics, liver function, and expression of intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) in patients with liver cancer undergoing surgery.
To evaluate the estrogen receptor coactivator amplified in breast cancer 1 (AIB1) as a prognostic marker, as well as a predictive marker for response to adjuvant tamoxifen and/or aromatase inhibitors, in early estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer.
The oncogene nuclear receptor coactivator amplified in breast cancer 1 (AIB1) is a transcriptional coactivator, which is overexpressed in various types of human cancers, including breast cancer.
GCN5 knockdown decreased the protein levels of the proliferation marker proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) and amplified in breast cancer 1 (AIB1), but increased the protein levels of cell cycle inhibitor p21(Cip1/Waf1) in HepG2 cells.
We previously demonstrated that amplified in breast cancer 1 (AIB1) and eukaryotic initiation factor 2 (EIF5A2) overexpression was an independent predictor of poor clinical outcomes for patients with bladder cancer (BCa).
Amplified in breast cancer 1 (AIB1) is frequently overexpressed in human HCC tissues and promotes HCC progression.
The estrogen receptor coactivator Amplified in Breast Cancer 1 (AIB1) has been associated with an improved response to adjuvant tamoxifen in breast cancer, but also with endocrine treatment resistance.
Amplified in breast cancer 1 (AIB1), also known as steroid receptor coactivator 3 (SRC-3), is a transcriptional coactivator that interacts with nuclear receptors and other transcription factors to enhance their effects on target gene transcription.
Apelin-13 also markedly increased the expression of cyclin D1, extracellular matrix metalloproteinase-1 and amplified in breast cancer 1 (AIB1) in a dose-dependent manner by polymerase chain reaction assays.
Amplified in breast cancer 1 (AIB1) is a member of p160 steroid receptor coactivator (SRC) family that mediates the transcriptional activities of nuclear receptors and other transcription factors.
Previous genetic studies revealed that mutations in protocadherin-19 (Pcdh19) lead to an epilepsy syndrome with a variable degree of cognitive disability.
The presence of endothelial markers, cluster of differentiation (CD)31 and vascular endothelial (VE)-cadherin, and mesenchymal markers, Alfa smooth muscle actin (SMA) and fibroblast-specific protein 1 (FSP1) was performed using immunohistochemistry.
Immunohistochemistry and double-immunofluorescence staining demonstrated that the expression of CD31 and VE-cadherin were significantly decreased in DCM samples, whereas the FSP-1, and AlfaSMA were significantly increased.
CD31 and VE-cadherin labeling indexes were respectively negatively correlated with left ventricular end-diastolic diameter (LVEDD) (CD31 r=-0.82, P&lt;0.01; VE-cadherin r=-0.73, P&lt;0.01), while FSP-1 and AlfaSMA were positively associated with LVEDD (AlfaSMA r=0.65, P&lt;0.01, FSP1 r=0.53, P&lt;0.01) and left ventricular ejection fraction (AlfaSMA r=-0.18, P&lt;0.05; FSP1 r=-0.21, P&lt;0.05).
Furthermore, PICP and PIIINP levels were positively associated with the co-expression labeling indexes (CD31/SMA co-labeling index and PICP r=0.727, P&lt;0.01; CD31/SMA co-labeling index and PIIINP r=0.741, P&lt;0.01; VE-Cadherin/FSP-1 co-labeling index and PICP r=0.716, P&lt;0.01; VE-cadherin/FSP-1 co-labeling index and PIIINP r=0.648, P&lt;0.05).
TRPV4 was co-localised with vascular endothelial (VE)-cadherin, and VE-cadherin expression was decreased by repeated intravenous administration of GSK1016790A during colitis.
In premenopausal women, two environmental factors (history of breastfeeding, and history of benign breast disease) and four genetic variants (TOX3-rs3803662, ESR1-rs2046210, 8q24-rs13281615, and SLC4A7-rs4973768) were considered to be risk predictors, whereas three environmental factors (body mass index, history of breastfeeding, and hyperlipidemia), serum levels of testosterone and 25-hydroxyvitamin D, and two genetic variants (TOX3-rs3803662 and ESR1-rs2046210) were identified as risk predictors.
Objective: To investigate the MRI characteristics of posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES) in patients with pre-eclampsia(PE) and its correlation with serum placental growth factor (PlGF), soluble endoglin (sEng) and sEng/PlGF ratio.
Conclusion: The value of sEng/PlGF ratio was correlated with brain edema score in PE.
However, relatively little data are available linking placenta growth factor (PIGF) with epilepsy.
Besides, SC-560 treatment improved hepatic encephalopathy and decrease plasma levels of PGF(1Alfa), but did not change TNF-Alfa levels.
Immunohistochemical reactivity with anti-human IL-38 monoclonal antibody (clone H127C) was evaluated semi-quantitatively in lung tissue samples from 12 patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis/usual interstitial pneumonia (IPF/UIP), 5 with acute exacerbation of IPF, and 10 with anticancer drug-induced ILD (bleomycin in 5 and epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitor in 5).
In this study, we used genetic approaches that revealed that endophilin B2 is not required for embryonic development in vivo but that endophilin B2 deficiency impairs endosomal trafficking in vitro, as evidenced by suppressed endosome acidification, EGFR degradation, autophagic flux, and influenza A viral RNA nuclear entry and replication.
Here we show that suppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS) five has a pivotal role in restricting influenza A virus in the airway epithelium, through the regulation of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR).
The frequency of EGFR mutations was significantly lower in adenocarcinomas in the H-IIP group, although the frequencies of KRAS and ALK mutations did not differ among the three groups.
Finally, we demonstrated that downregulation of A2bR inhibited the proliferation, migration and invasion of BUC in part via the MAPK signaling pathway, increasing the levels of P21 but decreasing the levels of cyclin B1, D, E1, MMP-2 and MMP-9.
Overexpression of MMP-2 could rescue BUC cells migration and invasion.
To determine the levels of MMP-2 and COX-2 mRNA in bladder transitional cell carcinoma tissues and explore their relationship.
MMP-2 and COX-2 mRNA are highly expressed in bladder transitional cell carcinoma tissues and their expressions are positively correlated with the degree of malignancy.
MMP-2 and COX-2 might play a synergetic role in the pathogenesis and progression of bladder transitional cell carcinoma.
However, the relationship between MMP2 activity in tumor tissue and tumor progression is still unclear in bladder transitional cell carcinoma (BTCC).
The aim of this study was to evaluate the significance of MMP2 in the progression of BTCC.
Of 20 BTCC tissues, activated MMP2 were detected in 19 cases and the activity was increased with the tumor grade and invasiveness.
The activities of the MMP2 was 8896.5+/-1655.6(mg x ml(-1))(-1) in grade I BTCC(n=11),18 355.6+/-5 307.1(mg x ml(-1))(-1) in grade II BTCC(n=5), and 26,467.1+/-4 705.6 (mg x ml(-1))(-1) in gradeIII BTCC (n=3).
Activated MMP2 might play a key role in the progression of BTCC and the gelatine zymography is a useful method for the detection of activated type IV collagenase.
To detect the level of matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) mRNA and the tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-2 (TIMP-2) mRNA in bladder transitional cell carcinoma (BTCC), and to estimate the prognosis for bladder tumor based on the quality and quantity of MMP-2 and TIMP-2 mRNA.
The level of the MMP-2 mRNA in BTCC was significantly increased compared with that in normal bladder epithelium.
The positive rates of MMP-2 and TIMP-2 mRNA were 71.4% and 65.7% in BTCC, and 66.7% and 60.0% in the normal bladder wall.
A high level of the MMP-2 mRNA exists in BTCC, which may function to damage collagen IV inside the basement membrane and the extracellular basement of the bladder.
The level of the MMP-2 mRNA is proportional to BTCC grading and staging, which may have prognostic value.
In human breast cancers, SLC2A1 was higher in ductal carcinoma in situ compared to the normal breast, but lower in invasive versus in situ lesions, suggesting the requirement for GLUT1 decreases as tumors progress.
The p16(INK4A) showed statistically significant odds ratios in CIN II, CIN III, and cancer; GLUT1, in CIN II and CIN III; hPygopus2, in CIN III; and beta-catenin, in CIN III and cancer.
We therefore studied HIF-1Alfa overexpression in ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS), an established precursor of invasive breast cancer.We used immunohistochemistry to examine the expression of the hypoxia markers HIF-1Alfa, CAIX and Glut-1 in DCIS and available invasive carcinoma lesions of 32 BRCA1, 16 BRCA2 and 77 non-BRCA mutation-related cases.
GLUT1 expression was higher in ductal carcinoma in situ, invasive ductal carcinoma, and lymph node metastasis than in normal tissue and ductal hyperplasia (p=0.002).
In contrast, the total positive rate of Glut1 in breast carcinoma was 58.8% (47/80); that in the ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) was 45.0% (9/20), that in the well-differentiated invasive carcinoma was 50.0% (15/30) and that in the poorly differentiated was 76.7% (23/30).
GLUT1 was expressed in nearly all cases of CIN and ISCC, however, CAIX was expressed only in CIN III and ISCC.
Multicellular spheroids recapitulating ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) microenvironmental conditions demonstrate upregulated glucose transporter 1 (GLUT1) as adaptation to hypoxia followed by growth into normoxic regions in qualitative agreement with model predictions.
We have overexpressed OTX2 in retinal pigmented epithelial cells before their transplantation in the eye of a model of retinitis pigmentosa carrying a mutation in Mertk, a gene specifically expressed by retinal pigmented epithelial cells.
Transplantation of OTX2-genetically modified cells may be medically effective for other retinal diseases involving the retinal pigmented epithelium as age-related macular degeneration.
Syndromic microphthalmia due to mutations in OTX2 can present with significant intrafamilial phenotypic variability.
Mutations in OTX2 are mostly identified in patients with anophthalmia/microphthalmia with variable severity.
Mutations in OTX2 cause hypopituitarism, ranging from isolated growth hormone deficiency to combined pituitary hormone deficiency (CPHD), which are commonly detected in association with severe eye abnormalities, including anophthalmia or microphthalmia.
We report a novel missense OTX2 (R89P) mutation in a CPHD patient with severe hypoglycemia in the neonatal period due to ACTH deficiency, bilateral microphthalmia, and agenesis of the left internal carotid artery (ICA).
Interestingly, C3 treatment resulted in decreased AR binding to target genes accompanied by decreased recruitment of an AR and Beta-catenin cofactor, coactivator-associated arginine methyltransferase 1 (CARM1), providing insight into the unrecognized function of Beta-catenin in prostate cancer.
Correspondingly, overexpression of CARM1 has been associated with the development of prostate cancer (PCa) and its progression to androgen-independent PCa.
Immunohistochemistry of CARM1 was performed on primary prostate cancer specimens.
CARM1 expression was increased in the nucleus of castration-resistant, but not androgen-stimulated prostate cancer.
CARM1 is essential for AR function and may play a role in prostate cancer progression.
CARM1 may represent a novel therapeutic target in prostate cancer.
The expression of CARM1 in normal prostate epithelium, high-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN), and prostate carcinoma tissue was examined in 66 previously untreated patients with prostate carcinomas, as well as 12 patients with hormone-independent prostate carcinoma, using immunohistochemical methods.
The authors found that overexpression of CARM1 was involved in the development of prostate carcinoma as well as androgen-independent prostate carcinoma.
Since CARM1 is functionally different from most other transcriptional coactivators of the AR, it may serve as a new target for the treatment of hormone-independent prostate carcinoma.
Moreover, knocking down of p21Waf1/Cip1 blocks the ability of Foxp1 to protect neurons from mut-Htt-induced neurotoxicity.
We propose that the selective vulnerability of neurons of the striatum and cortex in HD is related to the loss of expression of Foxp1, a protein that is highly expressed in these neurons and required for their survival.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT Although the mutant huntingtin gene is expressed widely, neurons of the striatum and cortex are selectively affected in Huntington's disease (HD).
Here, we report that the SINE compounds (KPT-350 or KPT-335) sequestered TBI-induced neuroinflammation-related proteins (NF-(k)B, AKT, FOXP1) within the nucleus of cultured primary rat cortical neurons, which coincided with protection against TNF-Alfa (20 ng/mL)-induced neurotoxicity as shown by at least 50% and 100% increments in preservation of cell viability and cellular enzymatic activity, respectively, compared to non-treated neuronal cells (P's &lt; 0.05).
We found that mouse Foxp1 overexpression in striatal cells elicited expression changes of genes related to immune signaling, transcriptional regulation and a manually curated Huntington's disease (HD)-signaling pathway.
Knowledge of SjS has progressed substantially, but this disease is still characterized by sicca symptoms, the systemic involvement of disease, lymphocytic infiltration to exocrine glands, the presence of anti-Ro/SSA and anti-La/SSB autoantibodies and the increased risk of lymphoma in patients with SjS.
Primary SS negative for anti-Ro/SSA and anti-La/SSB antibodies appears to be characterized by a lower risk of lymphoma and by a lower level of B-cell expansion.
Ubiquitous ASIP expression in mice gives rise to a pleiotropic phenotype characterized by a uniform yellow coat color, obesity, overgrowth, and metabolic derangements similar to type II diabetes in humans.
Proximity ligation assay quantified the expression levels of 36 pancreatic cancer-specific candidate seromarkers: Axl, BMP2, CA 125, CA 19-9, CEA, CXCL-1/6/9/10, EGFR, Gas6, Her2, IGF-2, IGFBP-2/3/7, IL-6/6Ra/7/8/12, mesothelin, MMP-1/2/3/7, osteopontin, PDGFRa, PDK1, PF4, RegIV, SPARC, TGF-Beta, VEGF-A/D, and YKL40.
Insulin-like growth factor binding protein 2 (IGFBP-2) is a member of the IGFBP family of proteins, and it is highly expressed in pancreatic cancer patients' serum and tumor tissues.
In this study, we sought to determine the impact of IGFBP-2 expression on pancreatic cancer tumorigenesis and metastasis in vitro and in vivo.
PTCH-1 is found contribute to the function of IGFBP-2 in suppressing metastasis and EMT of pancreatic cancer.
Silencing IGFBP-2 inhibited invasion and metastatic properties, partially through inhibiting PTCH1 in pancreatic cancer.
Additionally, inhibition of IGFBP-2 enhanced the sensitivity of pancreatic cancer cells to gemcitabine, suppressed tumor growth and potentiated the anti-tumor effect of gemcitabine in the orthotopic tumor model.
Our results provide novel insight of IGFBP-2 as a promising target to inhibit the metastasis and overcome the chemoresistance in pancreatic cancer.
Of these proteins, four proteins (apolipoprotein A-IV, apolipoprotein CIII, insulin-like growth factor binding protein 2 and tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase 1) were significantly altered in pancreatic cancer in both the discovery and validation phase (P &lt; 0.01).
To determine the prognostic role of three RBP genes: insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 2 (IGFBP2), RNA-binding motif protein 3 (RBM3), and cold-inducible RNA-binding protein (CIRP) in colon cancer.
We examined the RNA expression of IGFBP2, RBM3, and CIRP in 94 human colon cancer samples along with matched normal tissue samples from each patient using quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR).
The mean survival period was longer for patients with ABK, PBK, and secondary glaucoma, and shorter for patients who experienced graft ulcer or surface disorders.
In order to determine the prevalence of armadillos infected by Toxoplasma gondii and Leptospira spp., serum samples of 31 nine-banded armadillos (Dasypus novemcinctus), three six-banded armadillos (Euphractus sexcinctus), two naked-tailed armadillos (Cabassous tatouay) and two long-nosed armadillos (D. hybridus), captured in the mid-west region of the state of Sao Paulo, were analyzed for leptospirosis using the Microscopic Agglutination Test (MAT-l), and for toxoplasmosis using the Modified Agglutination Test (MAT-t).
It is not known how phospho-HLXB9 acts as an oncogenic factor in insulin-secreting Beta-cell tumors (insulinomas).
In this study we investigated the binding partners and target genes of phospho-HLXB9 in mouse insulinoma MIN6 Beta-cells.
Also, increased phospho-HLXB9 coincided with reduced Cblb and increased c-Met in insulinomas of two mouse models of menin loss.
These mechanisms have therapeutic implications for reducing Beta-cell proliferation in insulinomas by inhibiting phospho-HLXB9 or its interaction with Nono and modulating the expression of its direct (Cblb) or indirect (c-Met) targets.
Both pHLXB9 and active GSK-3Beta are elevated in Beta cells with menin knockdown, in MEN1-associated Beta cell tumors (insulinomas), and also in human sporadic insulinomas.
Taken together, these data suggest that the combination of GSK-3Beta and pHLXB9 forms a therapeutically targetable mechanism of insulinoma pathogenesis.
Our results reveal that GSK-3Beta and pHLXB9 can serve as novel targets for insulinoma treatment and have implications for understanding the pathways associated with Beta cell proliferation.
The presacral masses consistent with Currarino triad included anterior meningocoele in three patients, lipoma in two patients and anterior lipomeningocoele in one patient.
Increased factor VII and its activity, and plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 are among several findings contributing to a prothrombotic state in subclinical hypothyroidism.
Clinical factors were assessed, including: onset during or shortly after HD, defined as occurring within 12 h of HD; the presence of a lesion on diffusion-weighted MRI; hypotension, hyponatremia, or hypoglycemia at symptom onset; the stroke etiology; the presence of focal neurologic deficits; whether the patient was in the window period for intravenous tissue plasminogen activator (IVtPA) upon presentation, and whether the patient received IVtPA.
Mutations in Ceramide Kinase-Like (CERKL) cause autosomal recessive Retinitis Pigmentosa and Cone Rod Dystrophy.
Mutations in the Ceramide kinase like (CERKL) gene are associated with retinitis pigmentosa (RP26) and cone-rod dystrophy.
CERKL mutations are associated with severe retinal degeneration.
A novel gene (CERKL) has been described as associated with RP26.
A mutation in a new ceramide kinase (CERK) homologous gene, named CERK-like protein (CERKL), was found to cause autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa (RP26).
We also studied a naturally occurring CERKL mutant (R257X), recently linked to the pathology of retinitis pigmentosa.
Furthermore, we propose that the cause for retinitis pigmentosa in patients bearing the CERKL R257X mutation might be the accumulation of a truncated CERKL protein in the nucleus.
The present study examined predictors and moderators of treatment response among 165 adults meeting Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, fourth edition criteria for comorbid posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and alcohol dependence (AD), who were randomized to 24 weeks of Naltrexone (NAL), NAL and prolonged exposure (PE), pill placebo, or pill placebo and PE.
To examine the mechanisms of prolonged exposure (PE) and naltrexone (NAL) that underlie symptom reduction among individuals with comorbid posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and alcohol dependence (AD).
Non-parametric analysis, using the NPL statistic or FBAT, also did not support any linkage or association between the markers and panic disorder.
For agoraphobia, the most promising potential linkage was on chromosome 3 (NPL score = 2.75; P = 0.005).
We explored the association between obesity and periodontitis with the aim of determining the possible role of insulin resistance (IR) in this relationship.
Epidemiological studies suggest a close association between periodontitis and prediabetes/insulin resistance (IR) but whether periodontitis causes prediabetes in humans is not known.
Using various animal models, we have recently established that periodontitis can be an initiator of prediabetes, which is characterized by glucose intolerance, hyperinsulinemia and IR.
To investigate the effect of periodontal therapy in controlling periodontitis and on insulin resistance and lipid metabolism in obese rats with periodontitis.
Mutation of arylsulfatase A, arylsulfatase B, ceroid-lipofuscinosis neuronal 3, mucolipin, or Niemann-Pick disease type C1 respectively underlie several diseases of apparently insufficient autophagic flux that affect the eye, including: metachromatic leukodystrophy, mucopolysaccharidosis type VI, juvenile-onset Batten disease, mucolipidosis IV, and Niemann-Pick type C associated with myelin sheath destruction of corneal sensory and ciliary nerves and of the optic nerve; corneal clouding, ocular hypertension, glaucoma and optic nerve atrophy; accumulation of 'ceroid-lipofuscin' in surface conjunctival cells, and in ganglion and neuronal cells; decreased visual acuity and retinal dystrophy; and neurodegeneration.
To investigate whether nSR100 misregulation is causally linked to autism, we generated mutant mice with reduced levels of this protein and its target splicing program.
Moreover, increased neuronal activity, which is often associated with autism, results in a rapid decrease in nSR100 and splicing of microexons that significantly overlap those misregulated in autistic brains.
Collectively, our results provide evidence that misregulation of an nSR100-dependent splicing network controlled by changes in neuronal activity is causally linked to a substantial fraction of autism cases.
Neural microexons are frequently misregulated in the brains of individuals with autism spectrum disorder, and this misregulation is associated with reduced levels of nSR100.
These results indicated that rs11134527 in pri-miR-218-2 and rs531564 in pri-miR-124-1 could be associated with CIN and cervical cancer in the Chinese Han population.
Blood samples were collected from patients with high and low grade gliomas, both before and after surgical resection, and the expression of miR-21, miR-222 and miR-124-3p was measured in exosomes isolated from serum.
The expression levels of miR-21, miR-222 and miR-124-3p in serum exosomes of patients with high grade gliomas were significantly higher than those of low grade gliomas and healthy controls and were sharply decreased in samples obtained after surgery.
The analysis of miR-21, miR-222 and miR-124-3p in serum exosomes of patients affected by gliomas can provide a minimally invasive and innovative tool to help the differential diagnosis of gliomas at their onset in the brain and predict glioma grading and non glial metastases before surgery.
In the present study, we investigated the roles of MALAT1 and miR-124 in the regulation of retinoblastoma cell autophagy through evaluating the changes of autophagy-related proteins.
Through direct targeting miR-124, MALAT1 promotes retinoblastoma cell autophagy.
Further, we investigated whether Syntaxin 17 (STX17), a Soluble NSF Attachment Protein receptor of the autophagosome, is involved in MALAT1/miR-124 regulation of retinoblastoma cell autophagy, and the underlying mechanism.
The present study demonstrated that the protein expression levels of human circadian locomoter output cycles protein kaput (hCLOCK) is significantly increased, while miR-124 is attenuated in high-grade human CRC tissues and in the more invasive colorectal cancer cell lines SW620 and LOVO.
This study investigated 15-PGDH expression in gastric adenocarcinoma, the associations between 15-PGDH expression and clinicopathological factors, and the correlation between 15-PGDH expression and the 5-year gastric-cancer-specific survival rate (5-year GCSS).
Our findings indicate that 15-PGDH expression was low in gastric adenocarcinoma and was correlated with the clinicopathological factors associated with prognosis and a more advanced stage of gastric adenocarcinoma.
The aim of this study was to investigate the expression of 15-PGDH in gastric adenocarcinoma tissue and the relationship between 15-PGDH expression and clinicopathologic features of gastric adenocarcinoma.
In 62 patients (62.6%), 15-PGDH expression was lower in gastric adenocarcinoma tissue than in nonneoplastic tissue.
We determined the correlations between pattern of expression of 15-hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase (15-PGDH), a catabolic enzyme for biological inactivation of PGE(2), in gastric adenocarcinoma and various clinicopathological factors and patient outcome in an attempt to elucidate its biological significance.
In 35 of 71 cases of gastric adenocarcinoma, expression of 15-PGDH protein was reduced in tumor tissues.
These findings suggest that reduction of 15-PGDH is an independent predictor of poor survival associated with enhancement of cell proliferation in gastric adenocarcinoma.
Clinical gastric adenocarcinoma samples were analyzed by immunohistochemistry and quantitative real-time PCR for protein and mRNA expression of 15-PGDH and for methylation status of 15-PGDH promoter.
In clinical gastric adenocarcinoma specimens, 15-PGDH mRNA levels were 5-fold lower in gastric cancer samples when compared with paired nonneoplastic tissues (n = 26) and 15-PGDH protein was lost in 65% of gastric adenocarcinomas (n = 210).
Our findings suggest that we have cloned the long-sought RP3 gene, and that it may encode the GEF of a retina-specific GTP-binding protein.
These experiments suggest that in the rod photoreceptors of patients with retinitis pigmentosa carrying a mutation at Lys-296, there is persistent activation of the GTP-binding protein-mediated cascade.
These results indicate that the abilities of PGD2 analogues to stimulate the adenylate cyclase of the iris-ciliary body complex in GTP-dependent manner are highly correlated with their ocular hypotensive activities, and suggest that a PGD2 receptor-stimulatory GTP-binding protein-adenylate cyclase complex is involved in the PGD2-induced ocular hypotension.
Preincubation of human trophoblastic cells with 0.1 microgram/ml Islet-Activating-Protein (IAP; also called pertussis toxin) did not modify basal adenylate cyclase activity but abolished the inhibition of adenylate cyclase activity by EKC, indicating that the effect of opiates on cAMP production was mediated by an IAP-sensitive GTP binding protein.
LINGO2, a member of LRR gene family, has been linked with both Essential tremor (ET) and Parkinson's disease (PD).
We previously reported that CD109-deficient mice exhibit epidermal hyperplasia and chronic skin inflammation.
In this study, we investigated the role of CD109 in skin tumorigenesis using a two-stage carcinogenesis model in CD109-deficient mice with chronic skin inflammation.
CD109, a novel TGF-Beta co-receptor, which inhibits TGF-Beta signaling by enhancing Smad7-dependent degradation of TGF-Beta type I receptor (TGF-Beta RI), is abnormally expressed in psoriasis.
To date, the expression of Smad7 and the correlation between CD109 and Smad7 expression in psoriasis have not been fully elucidated.
This study was designed to investigate the expression and the correlation of CD109 and TGF-Beta signaling associated proteins in psoriasis and their roles in the pathogenesis of psoriasis.
Thirty-two psoriasis specimens were subjected to immunohistochemical staining for CD109, Smad7, TGF-Beta RI and Ki67.
The positive expression rate (% positive cells) of Smad7 and Ki67 in psoriasis was significantly higher than in NS (62.6%+/-19.9% vs. 17.2%+/-4.4%, and 50.7%+/-14.3% vs. 19.5%+/-3.2%, respectively, P&lt;0.001), and the expression levels of CD109 and TGF-Beta RI were reduced significantly in psoriasis as compared with NS (8.1%+/-6.7% vs. 35.8%+/-6.7% and 27.3%+/-3.4% vs. 3.0%+/-3.4%, respectively, P&lt;0.001).
These findings indicated that CD109 might play a certain role in the pathogenesis of psoriasis.
Lower expression of CD109 and TGF-Beta RI was highly correlated with higher expression of Smad7 and Ki67, suggesting that CD109 may induce the pathogenesis of psoriasis through Smad7-mediated degradation of TGF-Beta RI, and lead to the termination of TGF-Beta signaling.
Moreover, these effects are associated with an increase in phospho-STAT3 levels, enhanced total STAT3 and Bcl-2 expression and an increase in cell growth and survival, suggesting that released/soluble CD109 is able to induce molecular changes that are known to occur in psoriasis.
Analysis of CD109 expression in psoriasis patients reveals that CD109 protein expression is markedly decreased in psoriatic epidermis as compared to adjacent uninvolved skin.
Together our findings suggest that aberrant CD109 release from the cell surface in human keratinocytes may induce molecular changes that are usually observed in psoriasis and may explain TGF-Beta receptor downregulation and decrease in TGF-Beta signalling in psoriasis.
We report a case of allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA) that occurred in a man receiving infliximab for systemic sarcoidosis.
To investigate the effect of antithrombin III (AT III) on retinal ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) injury in rats.
PMM2-CDG is a rare metabolic disease, and the diagnosis should be considered in a child with developmental delay, elevated serum transaminases, decreased antithrombin III activity, inverted nipples, abnormal subcutaneous fat pads, esotropia, and cerebellar atrophy on MRI.
Using stringent filtering criteria, Apolipoprotein A-IV (APOA-IV), Albumin and Antithrombin 3 (ANT3) were detected at significantly higher levels in PCG AH compared to control, whereas Transthyretin (TTR), Prostaglandin-H2 D-isomerase (PTGDS), Opticin (OPT) and Interphotoreceptor Retinoid Binding Protein (IRBP) were detected at significantly lower levels.
However, the overall OR for the CCR5-Delta32 allele was significantly higher in Kawasaki disease (KD; OR 1.746, 95 % CI 1.003-2.955, p = 0.038) and the meta-analysis of the Delta32Delta32 + Delta32 W genotype showed a trend indicating an association with KD (OR 1.683, 95 % CI 0.921-3.077, p = 0.091).
We present data on the differences in BMNP levels in health and disease (cancer, neurodegenerative disorders, and atherosclerosis), and discuss the existing hypotheses on the biological functions of BMNPs, with special attention paid to the role of the ferritin core and apoferritin.
Another study cited a 9.9% reoperation rate for ASD 1 year following PLIF; this increased to 80% at 5 postoperative years.
Independent risk factors for nonattendance were: (i) age &lt;30 years (odds ratio (OR) 7.2; 95% CI: 3.2-16.3 versus &gt;=50 years); (ii) African region of origin (OR 2.8; 95% CI: 1.5-5.0 versus Western origin); (iii) having children &lt;12 years of age (OR 2.1; 95% CI: 1.1-4.1); (iv) history of drugs- or alcohol abuse (OR 4.4; 95% CI: 1.8-10.8); (v) no cART (OR 2.5; 95% CI: 1.1-5.3) or HIV-RNA &gt;400 copies/ml while receiving cART (OR 3.5; 95% CI: 1.3-9.6).
These included age, sex, transmission route, smoking, alcohol abuse, prior AIDS diagnosis, duration of exposure to cART, and estimated duration of human immunodeficiency virus infection.
Mutation in DnaJC19 results in dilated cardiomyopathy and ataxia syndrome, whereas expression of DnaJC15 regulates the response of cancer cells to chemotherapy.
Methylation-controlled J protein (MCJ, also known as DNAJC15) is a negative regulator of mitochondrial respiration and has been associated with chemotherapeutic drug sensitivity in cancer cell lines.
Here we show, in a retrospective study of a large cohort of breast cancer patients, that low MCJ expression in breast tumors predicts high risk of relapse in patients treated with chemotherapy; however, MCJ expression does not correlate with response to endocrine therapy.
In a prospective study in breast cancer patients undergoing neoadjuvant therapy, low MCJ expression also correlates with poor clinical response to chemotherapy and decreased disease-free survival.
Using MCJ-deficient mice, we demonstrate that lack of MCJ is sufficient to induce mammary tumor chemoresistance in vivo.
CpG island methylation in cancer cells constitutes the only mechanism identified for the regulation of MCJ gene expression.
Reduced expression of a mitochondrial J-protein DnaJC15 was associated with the development of chemoresistance in ovarian cancer cells.
In the present study, we have provided evidence towards a novel function of DnaJC15 in regulation of mitochondrial permeability transition pore (MPTP) complex in normal and cancer cells.
Hypermethylation-mediated transcriptional silencing of the MCJ gene has been associated with increased chemotherapeutic resistance in ovarian cancer.
MCJ is expressed in drug-sensitive breast cancer cells but not in multidrug-resistant cells.
To detect different expression patterns between the originally reported MCJ transcript and the LTR-related transcript, we performed a RT-PCR approach using various human tissues and cancer cells.
The original MCJ transcript was detected in human tissues and cancer cells, whereas the LTR-related transcript was only revealed in some cancer cells (HCT106, MCF-3, TE-1, Hela, and CCHM).
5'CpG of BCL2L10 and DNAJD1 was hypermethylated in 4 of 5 gastric cancer cell lines, whereas 5'CpG of DKK1 was hypermethylated in only 1 cell line.
We investigated the hypothesis that enhancing the activity of the protective axis of RAS by subretinal delivery of an AAV8 (Y733F)-ACE2 vector would protect against the ocular inflammation in experimental autoimmune uveitis (EAU) mice through regulating the local immune responses.
This proof-of-concept study suggests that activation of ocular ACE2/Ang-(1-7)/Mas axis with AAV gene transfer modulates local immune responses and may be a promising, long-lasting therapeutic strategy for refractory and recurrent uveitis, as well as other inflammatory eye diseases.
One approach to activate ACE2 involves the drug DIZE, which has been shown to have beneficial effects in experimental models of hypertension, pulmonary hypertension, myocardial infarction, stroke, atherosclerosis, type 1 diabetes, and eye disease.
We aimed to determine whether local retinal overexpression of adenoassociated virus (AAV)-ACE2 prevents or reverses diabetic retinopathy.
The aim of this study was to develop and evaluate the effects of chitosan inserts for sustained release of the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) activator, diminazene aceturate (DIZE), in experimental glaucoma.
Our previous study demonstrated that an intraperitoneal injection of Diminazene Aceturate (DIZE) attenuated uveitis by activating ocular angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2).
Oral feeding of mice with bioencapsulated ACE2/Ang-(1-7) significantly reduced endotoxin-induced uveitis (EIU) in mice.
The purpose of this study was to investigate the effect of endogenous ACE2 activation in preventing endotoxin-induced uveitis (EIU) in mice.
These results support the notions that RAS plays a role in modulating ocular immune response and that enhancing ACE2 provides a novel therapeutic strategy for uveitis.
We had previously shown that the expression of heparin/heparan sulfate interacting protein/ribosomal protein L29 (HIP/RPL29) was upregulated in colon cancer tissues.
The present study investigated the role of HIP/RPL29 in differentiation in colon cancer cells.
In conclusion, HIP/RPL29 plays a role in the cellular differentiation process in colon cancer cells.
Particularly, the variants of GPR101, GPR161, and GPR88 are related to the genetic diseases: growth hormone-secreting pituitary adenoma 2, pituitary stalk interruption syndrome (not confirmed), and childhood-onset chorea with psychomotor retardation, respectively.
For example, Kif5A, but not other Kinesin-1 heavy-chain family members, is implicated in Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) and Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia (HSP), but the mechanism of its involvement in the progressive axonal degeneration characteristic of these diseases is not well understood.
Protrudin was found to interact with other HSP-related proteins including myelin proteolipid protein 1 (SPG2), atlastin-1 (SPG3A), REEP1 (SPG31), REEP5 (similar to REEP1), Kif5A (SPG10), Kif5B, Kif5C, and reticulon 1, 3, and 4 (similar to reticulon 2, SPG12).
SPG10 is an autosomal dominant form of hereditary spastic paraplegia caused by mutations in KIF5A, which encodes one of the isoforms of kinesin-1 (KIF5A, KIF5B, and KIF5C).
The contribution of the sensory and autonomic nervous system to experimentally induced tennis elbow or lateral epicondylalgia was investigated by analyses of the release of neuropeptides from sensory (substance P, SP, neurokinin A, NKA, calcitonin gene-related peptide, CGRP) and sympathetic (neuropeptide Y, NPY) nerves.
The DLST was positive in 3 of 6 cases of suspected drug-induced pneumonia, but the suspected drugs were ruled out by the provocation test.
PBM was found focally in other interstitial lung diseases, which were assessed for this lesion: 59% of usual interstitial pneumonia (17 of 29), 50% of nonspecific interstitial pneumonia (10 of 20), desquamative interstitial pneumonia (3 of 6), hypersensitivity pneumonitis (9 of 18), and 11% of respiratory bronchiolitis (2 of 18).
Conditioning was aborted for 3 of 6 patients; none had progression to RSV pneumonia.
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients who have had an episode of acute hypercapnic respiratory failure (AHRF) have a large 1-year risk of death or readmission.
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a preventable and treatable disease responsible for a large human and economic burden around the world.
Three miRNA ratios (miR-17-5p/miR-135b, miR-92a-3p/miR135b, and miR-451a/miR-491-5p) were validated for discriminating patients with adenoma and those with CRC from the healthy control group, and 5 miRNA ratios (let-7b/miR-367-3p, miR-130a-3p/miR-409-3p, miR-148-3p/miR-27b, miR-148a-3p/miR-409-3p, and miR-21-5p/miR-367-3p) were validated for discriminating patients with CRC from those with adenoma and healthy controls.
MicroRNA-92a (miR-92a) was recently reported to have an oncogenic role in cervical cancer; however, the underlying mechanism remains largely unclear.
The present study aimed to investigate the expression, clinical significance and regulatory mechanism of miR-92a in cervical cancer.
Reverse transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) data indicated that miR-92a was significantly upregulated in cervical cancer tissues compared with matched adjacent non-tumor tissues (P&lt;0.01).
Knockdown of miR-92a significantly inhibited the viability and invasion of cervical cancer HeLa cells, while overexpression of miR-92a significantly enhanced HeLa cell viability and invasion (P&lt;0.01).
Additionally, DKK3 was significantly downregulated in cervical cancer tissues compared with adjacent non-tumor tissues (P&lt;0.01), inversely correlated to the miR-92a levels in cervical cancer tissues (P&lt;0.01).
In summary, the present study indicated that miR-92a promotes cell viability and invasion in cervical cancer, partly at least, via inhibiting the protein expression of DKK3.
Therefore, the present study highlights the clinical significance of the miR-92a/DKK3 axis in cervical cancer.
Obesity is associated with local tissue hypoxia and elevated hypoxia-inducible factor 1 alpha (HIF-1Alfa) in metabolic tissues.
Whole exome sequencing analysis obtained ~2.0 Gb of data (an average of 60x depth for each targeted base), and further validation experiments identified two functional variants in two cancer-related genes (c.1218delA:p.E406fs in PDE4DIP and C1342A:p.L448I in CLTCL1).
Compared with amyloidosis glomeruli, FGN glomeruli exhibited a &gt;6-fold overexpression of DNAJB9 protein.
Approximately half of ERdj4(GT/GT) mice died perinatally associated with fetal growth restriction, reduced hepatic glycogen stores, and hypoglycemia.
Elevated ER stress in pancreatic Beta cells of ERdj4(GT/GT) mice was associated with Beta cell loss, hypoinsulinemia, and glucose intolerance.
The study involved 110 cases of Philadelphia negative Myeloproliferative diseases (MPDs), 70 cases with Polycythemia Vera (PV), 24 cases with Essential Thrombocytosis (ET) and 16 cases with Idiopathic Myelofibrosis (IMF) and 20 cases as a control group which represented as; (10 cases with secondary erythrocytosis, 1 case with reactive thrombocytosis, 4 cases as normal control and 5 as Philadelphia positive Chronic Myeloid Leukemia cases), they were collected from National Cancer Institute (NCI) over 3 years.
Screening for the mutation in all cases suspected of chronic MPD could be beneficial in differentiating patients with reactive erthrocytosis or thrombocytosis from the true clonal MPDs especially polycythaemia vera.
Hematologic disorders including myeloproliferative disorders (MPDs), myelodysplasia, paraproteinemias, and immune thrombocytopenia (ITP) can also be associated with hemorrhagic complications due to platelet dysfunction.
Immunohistochemical staining and Western blotting were performed to evaluate the expression level of DJ-1 in oral leukoplakia (OLK) and OSCC tissues respectively.
Then lentiviral mediated DJ-1 shRNA was constructed and used to infect the OSCC cell lines (Tca8113 and CAL-27).
The immunoreactivity and expression level of DJ-1 protein was significantly increased in OLK and OSCC tissues compared with the controls.
The proliferative and invasion ability of OSCC cell lines was significantly suppressed following DJ-1 inhibition (P&lt;0.01).
These findings suggest that DJ-1 might be actively involved in the development of OSCC.
Future studies will investigate the potential of DJ-1 as a biomarker for early detection of OSCC.
The correlation of DJ-1 expression with LPC markers was examined in the liver of patients with hepatitis B or hepatitis C virus (HBV and HCV, respectively) infection, primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC), primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC), nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), cirrhosis or hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), respectively.
Mechanistically, we found that HSCs isolated from DJ-1 KO mice had decreased secretion of macrophage-mobilizing chemokines, such as CCL2 and CX3CL1, resulting in impaired macrophage infiltration.
The aim of this study was to identify potential downstream effectors of the oncogene DJ-1 in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cell lines, and examine its role in the Akt signaling pathway and HCC oncogenesis.
LP/NPL resulted in better glycaemic control than HR/NPH without increasing the risk of hypoglycaemia.
We describe the case of a 6-year-old boy with both fragile X syndrome and Robertsonian Translocation (45, XY, der (13; 22) (q10; q10)).
Mosaic Turner syndrome (TSM) commonly occurs in the form of 45,X/46,XX and 45,X/46,X,i(X)(q10).
We present here a 16-year-old Turner syndrome patient with a complex karyotype that includes a maternally-inherited balanced translocation between chromosomes 4 and 16 and mosaicism of the isochromosome Xq10.
Results discrepancies between karyotype and FISH were found in 10 patients, including detection of low-level monosomy X mosaicism in 6 patients with normal karyotype, and detection of mosaic aneuploidy chromosome 18 in 1 patient with 45,XX,rob(13;14)(q10;q10).Statistical analysis showed no significant association between the groups and the type of chromosomal abnormalities.
No obvious phenotype of Turner syndrome was observed in this patient and cytogenetic analysis revealed that her karyotype is 46,X,i(X)(q10).
Sixty-four children (11.6%) were confirmed with IEM by the MS/MS, including 33 cases of methylmalonic acidemia or propionic acidemias, 2 cases of phenylketonuria, 3 cases of carnitine palmotoyl transferase I deficiency, 1 case of long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency, 2 cases of medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency, 6 cases of maple syrup urine disease, 2 cases of short-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency, 2 cases of glutaric acidemia type I, 2 cases of isovaleric acidemia, 2 cases of homocystinuria, 4 cases of carnitine deficiency, 1 case of tyrosinemia, 1 case of argininosuccinic aciduria, 2 cases of citrullinemia and 1 case of argininemia.
Genes that have been implicated in monogenic CVID include ICOS, TNFRSF13B (TACI), TNFRSF13C (BAFF-R), TNFSF12 (TWEAK), CD19, CD81, CR2 (CD21), MS4A1 (CD20), TNFRSF7 (CD27), IL21, IL21R, LRBA, CTLA4, PRKCD, PLCG2, NFKB1, NFKB2, PIK3CD, PIK3R1, VAV1, RAC2, BLK, IKZF1 (IKAROS) and IRF2BP2 With the increasing number of disease genes identified in CVID, it has become clear that CVID is an umbrella diagnosis and that many of these genetic defects cause distinct disease entities.
Human IL-21 and IL-21R deficiencies cause severe, primary immunodeficiency reminiscent of common variable immunodeficiency.
The function of the IL-21R : IL-4R system seems not to be related to the aetiology of CVID in paediatric patients and might be suitable for a regenerative therapy.
The exonic, protein coding regions of the genes encoding: APRIL, BCMA, IL10, IL10Ralpha, IL10Rbeta, IL21, IL21R, and CCL18, were analyzed primarily in familial CVID cases, who showed evidence of genetic linkage to the respective candidate gene loci and CVID families with a recessive pattern of inheritance.
Two novel SNPs were identified in exon 5 and exon 8 of the IL21R gene, which segregated with the disease phenotype in one CVID family.
Mice lacking both IL-4 and IL-21R exhibited a significantly more pronounced phenotype, with dysgammaglobulinemia, characterized primarily by a severely impaired IgG response.
Here, we studied phenotypes associated with mutations in the schizophrenia susceptibility gene dysbindin (dysb), in isolation or in combination with null alleles in the dysb network component Blos1.
DEGs of NAMPT, TLR9, PTGS2, HBD, and PCSK1N might be associated with obesity.
We compared the prevalence of four polymorphisms, the sickle hemoglobin mutation (Beta globin E6V), the Alfa-thalassemia 3.7kb deletion, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency caused by the common African variant (G6PD A-), and the CD36 T188G mutation in 1344 individuals residing in districts in eastern (Tororo), south-central (Jinja), and southwestern (Kanungu) Uganda.
Conclusion: Renal hemosiderosis and asymptomatic renal dysfunction are prevalent among transfusion- dependent Beta-thalassemia major patients which necessitate regular screening with early markers of glomerular and tubular dysfunction.
Diabetes mellitus (DM) is one of the potential complications in patients with transfusion-dependent Beta-thalassemia major (Beta-TM).
To evaluate the clinical course after early surgical treatment with excision of retinal hemangioblastomas (RHs) before development of major complications.
Nine of the cases had an involuted hemangioma, and 29 cases had a vascular malformation; of the vascular malformations, 13, 11, one, and four cases involved were capillary malformations (CMs), venous malformations (VMs), lymphatic malformations (LMs), and arteriovenous malformations (AVMs), respectively.
The overall average satisfaction score was 4.1 out of 5, while the satisfaction scores associated with each lesion type were 4.2 for hemangiomas, 3.9 for CMs, 4.2 for VMs, 5.0 for LMs, and 4.0 for AVMs.
Human lymphatic vascular malformations (LMs), also known as cystic hygromas or lymphangioma, consist of multiple lymphatic endothelial cell-lined lymph-containing cysts.
Although cutaneous epidermolysis bullosa is difficult to diagnose prenatally, shortening and deformity of extremities may provide a clue to the diagnosis, even when the maternal alpha-fetoprotein concentration is normal.
The aim of this study was to investigate the possible relationship between cord bloodalpha-fetoprotein (AFP) level and development of subsequent neonatal hyperbilirubinemia.
Repeat maternal serum alpha-fetoprotein assay allows identification of patients who should be offered amniocentesis to evaluate the risk of nephrotic syndrome and epidermolysis bullosa.
Intracardiac repair of pulmonary atresia with ventricular septal defect and major aortopulmonary collateral arteries can be accomplished by a midline 1-stage repair including complete unifocalization of all pulmonary blood supply without individual collateral anastomosis in selected patients.
Six of the PSENEN mutation carriers presented with comorbid acne inversa (AI), an inflammatory hair follicle disorder, and had a history of nicotine abuse and/or obesity, which are known trigger factors for AI.
Furthermore, NSE/hPen-2 Tg mice exhibiting feeding behavior dysfunction were significantly more apt to display symptoms related to diabetes and obesity.
KD and Bmax values for [3H][D-Ala2,(Me)Phe4, Gly(ol)5]enkephalin and [3H][D-Pen2,D-Pen5]enkephalin to cerebral mu and delta opiate receptors were not altered by diabetes.
The study was carried out in 60 insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM) patients (33 women and 27 men) chosen according to two criteria: (1) the use of a Medisense Pen 2 or Companion 2; (2) autonomous self-monitoring of blood glucose, i.e.
Separation was achieved with a Waters Atlantis dC18 column (LC-MS) or a Waters SymmetryShield RP18 column connected with an Atlantis dC18 (LC-UV).
Separation was achieved with a SymmetryShield RP18 column and an Atlantis dC18 column using a 10 mM potassium phosphate buffer as mobile phase.
The aim of the study was to investigate the effect of Plpp3 deletion on atherosclerosis development in mice.
Lipidomic analysis showed that hepatic Plpp3 deletion significantly modified the levels of several plasma lipids involved in atherosclerosis, including lactosylceramides, lysophosphatidic acids, and lysophosphatidylinositols.
In conclusion, Plpp3 ablation in mice worsened atherosclerosis development.
Lipidomic analysis suggested that the hepatic Plpp3 deletion may promote atherosclerosis by increasing plasma levels of several low-abundant pro-atherogenic lipids, thus providing a molecular basis for the observed results.
A polymorphism (rs17114036) in PPAP2B is associated with coronary artery disease, which prompted us to investigate the possible role of LPP3 in human endothelial dysfunction, a condition promoting atherosclerosis.
However, it is unclear whether genome-wide association studies-identified coronary artery disease genes, including PPAP2B, participate in mechanotransduction mechanisms by which vascular endothelia respond to local atherorelevant hemodynamics that contribute to the regional nature of atherosclerosis.
Our results do not confirm association between ABO rs579459, PPAP2B rs17114036, ADAMTS7 rs3825807, PIK3CG rs17398575, and EDNRA rs1878406 and subclinical atherosclerosis and CV disease in RA.
Although emerging evidence links lysophosphatidic acid to atherosclerosis and vascular injury responses, little is known about the role of vascular LPP3.
The G-protein-coupled estrogen receptor (GPR30, GPER-1) is a member of the G-protein-coupled receptor 1 family and is expressed significantly in uterine leiomyomas.
To understand the relationship between GPR30 single nucleotide polymorphisms and the risk of leiomyoma, we measured the follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and estradiol (E2) levels of 78 perimenopausal healthy women and 111 perimenopausal women with leiomyomas.
However, the GG genotype of the GPR30 rs3808351 polymorphism and G allele of the GPR30 rs3808351 polymorphism were associated with the risk of having a single leiomyoma.
Our results suggest that the presence of the GG genotype of the GPR30 rs3808351 polymorphism and the G allele of the GPR30 rs3808351 polymorphism affect the characteristics and development of leiomyomas in the Turkish population.
G protein-coupled estrogen receptor 1 (GPER-1, formerly known as GPR30) has been proposed as the receptor for estrogen-induced, growth of leiomyomas though its precise mechanisms of action are not clear.
These observations indicate that GPER targeting for the therapy of Leydig cell tumor may represent a good alternative to cisplatin to preserve fertility in Leydig tumor patients.
Immunohistochemical analysis of tissue sections of murine lung adenomas as well as human lung adenocarcinomas, squamous cell carcinomas and non-small cell lung carcinomas showed consistently higher expression of GPER in the tumor relative to the surrounding non-tumor tissue.
To determine differential expression of G-protein-coupled receptor 30 (GPR30) in uterine leiomyoma and its matched myometrium.
Using Western blot and real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction analyses, we found that GPR30 was highly expressed in uterine leiomyomas compared with their matched myometrium.
In only three out of nine patients examined was GPR30 protein detectable by Western blot analysis in myometrial tissues, but at statistically significantly lower levels than in their leiomyomas.
Confocal microscopy revealed the nuclear localization of GPR30 in leiomyoma tissues and cultured leiomyoma smooth muscle cells (SMCs).
Treatment with 0.1 myM 17Beta-estradiol increased mRNA expression of GPR30 in leiomyoma SMCs but decreased expression in myometrial SMCs.
GPR30 is abundantly expressed in uterine leiomyomas, likely resulting from estrogen stimulation.
The role of membrane estrogen receptor-alpha (mERalpha) in rapid nongenomic responses to 17beta-estradiol (E(2)) was tested in sublines of GH3/B6 rat prolactinoma cells selected for high (GH3/B6/F10) and low (GH3/B6/D9) mERalpha expression.
Poikiloderma with Neutropenia (PN) is inherited genodermatosis which results from a biallelic mutation in the USB1 gene (U Six Biogenesis 1).
Our case series shows that biallelic variants in USB1, LIG4 and GRHL2, the genes mutated in poikiloderma with neutropenia, LIG4/Dubowitz syndrome and the recently recognized ectodermal dysplasia/short stature syndrome, respectively, cause features that overlap with dyskeratosis congenita.
Patients with clinical features of dyskeratosis congenita need to have genetic analysis of USB1, LIG4 and GRHL2 in addition to the classical dyskeratosis congenita genes and telomere length measurements.
Poikiloderma with neutropenia (PN, Clericuzio-type poikiloderma with neutropenia) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder caused by biallelic mutations in the USB1 gene (Alias C16orf57 and MPN1).
Germline mutations of the U6 biogenesis 1 (USB1) gene underlie Poikiloderma with Neutropenia (PN), a rare autosomal recessive genodermatosis conferring an increased risk of myelodysplasia.
Mutations in the human MPN1 gene are associated with the genodermatosis Clericuzio-type poikiloderma with neutropenia (PN).
The schwannomatosis cell lines were stained with S100B antibodies to confirm Schwann cell identity.
The schwannomatosis cells also expressed the Schwann cell markers, p75NTR, S100B, and NGF after multiple passages.
We calculated whole-body tumor burden in subjects with NF1, NF2, and schwannomatosis using whole-body MRI (WBMRI) and measured the concentration of S100Beta in plasma using ELISA.
In particular, we will highlight recent work done on the regulation of DNA double-strand breaks signalling and repair by the RNF8/RNF168 E3 ubiquitin ligases, the Fanconi anemia pathway and the role of protein degradation in the enforcement and termination of checkpoint signalling.
Serum tenascin-C levels of 33 patients with scleroderma (SSc), 10 patients with scleroderma spectrum disorder (SSD), 15 patients with localized scleroderma (LSc), 12 patients with dermatomyositis (DM), 10 patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and 15 healthy controls were measured with specific enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays.
Because promoter methylation of GATA5 has previously been associated with gastric cancer, we also tested for the association of methylation status with more advanced histopathology scores in our samples and found a significant relationship (p = 0.001).
GATA5 is a transcription factor that is capable of suppressing the development of various types of human cancer.
The present study investigated the expression of GATA5 and GATA4, and examined their roles in the proliferation and colony formation ability of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) tissues and cells.
To investigate GATA5, SFRP2, and ITGA4 methylation in plasma DNA as noninvasive biomarkers for colorectal cancer (CRC) or adenomas.
Previously, we identified N-Myc downstream-regulated gene 4 (NDRG4) and GATA binding protein 5 (GATA5) methylation as promising biomarkers for colorectal cancer in stool DNA.
The sensitivity of NDRG4, GATA5, FOXE1, and SYNE1 methylation in all stages of colorectal cancer (154 cases, 444 controls) was 27% [95% confidence interval (CI), 20%-34%), 18% (95% CI, 12%-24%), 46% (95% CI, 38%-54%), and 47% (95% CI, 39%-55%), with a specificity of 95% (95% CI, 93%-97%), 99% (95% CI, 98%-100%), 93% (95% CI, 91%-95%), and 96% (95% CI, 94%-98%), respectively.
To evaluate the diagnostic values of using autoantibodies in sera to a panel of eight tumor-associated antigens (TAAs) of P53, Koc, P62, C-myc, IMP1, Survivn, P16 and Cyclin B1 full-length recombinant proteins for early detection of patients with gastric cardia adenocarcinoma (GCA) and high-risk subjects screening.
To analyze retinal thickness (RT) and choroidal thickness (ChT) changes in patients with unilateral nongranulomatous acute anterior uveitis (AAU) using three-dimensional (3D) 1060-nm optical coherence tomography (OCT).
Refraction under cycloplegia, axial length, and subfoveal ChT were measured at baseline with comparative investigations at 15 months follow-up.
PurposeTo follow choroidal thickness (ChT) over time in birdshot retinochoroiditis (BRC) using enhanced depth imaging optical coherence tomography (EDI-OCT) and study the effect of early and sustained treatment on ChT.Patients and methodsEighteen patients were included and EDI-OCT measurements of ChT were analyzed retrospectively in five groups of patients with follow-up times ranging from 1 year to &gt;=15 years.
To investigate the changes in choroidal thickness (ChT) following panretinal photocoagulation (PRP) for diabetic retinopathy (DR) and compare ChT in relation to DR severity.
The central field ChT of severe NPDR (323.2 +/- 61.3 mym) was significantly thicker than that of normal (248.3 +/- 70.7 mym) and mild to moderate NPDR (230.0 +/- 70.3 mym, P = 0.0455 and 0.0099, respectively).
ChT of severe NPDR and PDR was significantly thicker than that of mild to moderate NPDR.
Ten cases of presumed endophthalmitis were documented: 4 in 50,721 at CHT (95% CI: 0.0071-0.0087%), 2 in 44,666 at ZUH (95% CI: 0.0039-0.0051%), and 4 in 39,314 at UCB (95% CI: 0.0092-0.011%).
To investigate longitudinal changes in intraocular pressure (IOP), axial length (AL), and choroidal thickness (ChT) in primary open-angle glaucoma (POAG) eyes after trabeculectomy and to evaluate the parameters that might influence those changes.
The association between subfoveal ChT and systemic, as well as ocular factors, including age, sex, height, weight, body mass index, axial length, refractive error, intraocular pressure, preterm history, and the refractive status of parents were studied.
ChT differed significantly between males and females 2-mm temporal to the fovea in the emmetropia group (P&lt;0.05), and 1-mm temporal to the fovea in the mild myopia group (P&lt;0.05).
The aim of this study was to investigate variants in UCP2 genes in type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM) and diabetic retinopathy (DR) in Chinese population.
This may provide experimental evidence for the application of UCP2 as a new protective factor for diabetic complications, such as diabetic retinopathy.
The aim of this study was to investigate the expression of uncoupling protein 2 (UCP2) and zonula occludens-1 (ZO-1) in the trabecular meshwork (TM) of neovascular glaucoma (NVG) patients treated with trabeculectomy.
ZC4H2 is involved in human brain development, and, if mutated, can be responsible for a rare X-linked disorder, originally presented in literature as Wieacker-Wolff syndrome and Miles-Carpenter syndrome.
To compare the relevant indicators of coagulation and fibrinolysis in patients with varying severity of community-acquired pneumonia (CAP).
The D-dimer, fibrinogen degradation products (FDPs), fibrinogen (FIB), activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) and prothrombin time (PT) in pneumonia group were significantly higher than those in control group ((1.86 +/- 1.28) vs (0.48 +/- 0.38) mg/L, (6.42 +/- 3.27) vs (2.17 +/- 1.46) mg/L, (3.87 +/- 1.17) vs (3.42 +/- 0.96) g/L, (35.64 +/- 8.34) vs (31.29 +/- 11.19) s, (12.21 +/- 1.40) vs (11.36 +/- 2.19) s, all P &lt; 0.05) while thromboplastin time (TT) was lower than that in control group ((13.43 +/- 3.38) vs (16.16 +/- 2.89) s, P &lt; 0.05).
And the patients with pneumonia have coagulation and fibrinolysis disorders.
To explore and evaluate the predictive value of coagulopathy in patients with community-acquired pneumonia (CAP) METHODS: A retrospective study was performed by investigating the prothrombin time (PT), activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT), plasma fibrinogen (FIB), thrombin time (TT), platelets (PLT), and D-dimer in 385 patients with CAP, who were admitted to the Respiratory Medical Department of the First Affiliated Hospital of Xiamen University from June, 2010 to May, 2011.
To identify whether the helper T lymphocyte 1 (Th1)/helper T lymphocyte 2 (Th2) of patients' serum and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) at admission could represent the severity of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) and whether its change at six months could predict the progression of the disease.
The DNA binding activities of NF-KB, the contents of TNF-Alfa, PCT, CRP, fibrinogen (Fib), D-dimer in hospitalized subjects with severe pneumonia were higher before treatment than those in healthy control group, while the prothrombin time (PT), thrombin time (TT) were significantly lower (P&lt;0.05 or P&lt;0.01).
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is associated with significant morbidity and mortality despite aggressive therapy.
Evaluate the prognostic and predictive impact of HPV-associated p16-expression and assess the combined prognostic impact of p16 and smoking on altered fractionated radiotherapy (AFRT) for oropharyngeal cancer (OPC) within the frames of the update of the Meta-Analysis of Radiotherapy in Carcinomas of Head and neck (MARCH).
Twelve patients with p16 positive oropharyngeal cancer were enrolled.
For patients with p16-negative pharyngeal cancer receiving radiotherapy, treatment outcomes can be stratified by VEGF and GLUT1 expression and CT-based gross tumor volume.
Nodal staging has dramatically changed so that there are different tables for human papillomavirus/p16(+) oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma, Epstein-Barr virus-related nasopharyngeal carcinoma, and all other head and neck squamous cell carcinomas.
Taken together, our results suggest that targeting druggable proteins in the MEK1/MP1/ERK1/BCL2 axis, such as MEK1 or BCL2, with currently available FDA approved drugs is a currently feasible approach to improve clinical outcomes of mesenchymal lung cancer patients.
Our data report for the first time that Cks1b employs Hsp90 and MEK1/2 pathways in lung cancer cells to develop chemoresistance and identify 3-COA as a potential antitumor drug for clinical treatment of chemoresistant lung cancer.
To further dissect the mechanisms regulating CD13-dependent trafficking we used the murine model of thioglycollate-induced sterile peritonitis.
Furthermore, treatment with anti-CD13 antibodies in a murine model of peritonitis results in a decrease in leukocyte infiltration into the peritoneum, suggesting a potential role for CD13 in leukocyte trafficking in vivo.
Our results indicate that miR-335 expression is an independent prognostic factor for patients with esophageal cancer, which might be a potential valuable biomarker for ESCC.
The following disorders will be discussed in this review: supravalvular aortic stenosis; Williams-Beuren syndrome; cutis laxa; Marfan syndrome; ectopia lentis; familial thoracic aortic aneurysms and dissections; MASS syndrome; isolated skeletal features of Marfan syndrome; Shprintzen-Goldberg syndrome; and congenital contractural arachnodactyly.
Although the labor inspection had disclosed considerable exposure to carbon disulfide (CS&amp;inf2;) in a Belgian viscose rayon factory, the company medical officer had not diagnosed any case of polyneuropathy in association with CS&amp;inf2; exposure, although this finding had been extensively reported in the literature.
Significant associations were found between the cumulative CS&amp;inf2; index and symptoms consistent with polyneuropathy in the legs and with abnormal recruitment pattern and decrease of motor conduction velocities of the peroneal nerves.
We describe a moyamoya (MMD) patient with bilateral consecutive branch retinal vein occlusion (BRVO).
The random amphiphilic polymeric aggregation, self-assembled from poly (methyl methacrylate-co-methacrylic acid) (P(MMA-co-MAA)), was explored as a novel pseudostationary phase (PSP) in electrokinetic chromatography (EKC) in our previous report.
PGA increased MMA in therapy-naive glaucomatous patients, indicating a possible enhancement of the trans-conjunctival aqueous humor outflow.
In addition to confirming known associations, a systemic lupus erythematosus-associated risk variant at TNXB was also associated with CKD attributed to type 1 diabetes (p = 2.5 x 10-7), a membranous nephropathy-associated variant at HLA-DQA1 was also associated with CKD attributed to systemic lupus erythematosus (p = 5.9 x 10-6), and an IgA risk variant at HLA-DRB1 was associated with both CKD attributed to granulomatosis with polyangiitis (p = 2.0 x 10-4) and to type 1 diabetes (p = 4.6 x 10-11).
We found significantly higher frequency of HLA-DRB1*13 (OR = 5.1; 95% CI, 1.7 to 15.4; P = 0.03) and development of end-stage renal disease (OR = 5.8; 95% CI, 1.7 to 19.7; P = 0.008) in hAPLN compared with lupus nephritis.
ESRD patients were examined for HLA-DRB1 alleles according to a reverse hybridization line probe assay.
Polymerase chain reaction-sequence specific primer method was used to analyze the HLA polymorphisms (including HLA-A, HLA-B and HLA-DRB1 loci) in both ESRD patients and controls.
The frequencies of five alleles, HLA-A*24, HLA-B*55, HLA-B*54, HLA-B*40(60), HLA-DRB1*04, and one haplotype (HLA-A*11-B*27-DRB1*04) in ESRD patients are significantly higher than those in the controls, respectively.
Five HLA alleles and one haplotype at the HLA-A, HLA-B and HLA-DRB1 loci appear to be associated with ESRD within the Cantonese population.
Here we describe a different function for MMP-9 in B-CLL, which involves the hemopexin domain rather than its catalytic function.
Binding of soluble or immobilized (pro)MMP-9, a catalytically inactive proMMP-9 mutant, or the MMP-9 hemopexin domain to its docking receptors alpha4beta1 integrin and CD44v, induces an intracellular signaling pathway that prevents B-CLL apoptosis.
Immunoinhibition experiments using the antibody against the placental receptor revealed inhibition of binding of 125I-hemopexin to human leukemia K562 and HL 60 cells, thereby strongly supporting that the polypeptide isolated from the human placenta was the hemopexin receptor.
The binding of 125I-labeled human hemopexin to human leukemia HL60 cell at 4 degrees C was saturable with time and with increasing concentrations of 125I-hemopexin.
Cells expressing markers Islet-1 and Hb9 are also generated from the LCCS NPCs, suggesting that the pathogenic mechanism of LCCS does not directly affect the differentiation capacity or survival of the cells, but the absence of motoneurons in LCCS may be caused by a noncell autonomous mechanism.
Described disorders caused by mutations in the ARX gene include: hydrocephaly with abnormal genitalia (HYD-AG), lissencephaly with abnormal genitalia (XLAG), agenesis of corpus callosum with abnormal genitalia (ACC-AG), Partington syndrome (PRTS), X-linked infantile spasms (ISSX), myoclonic epilepsy with spasticity and mental retardation (XMESID), and nonspecific mental retardation (NS-XLMR).
A previous study provided evidence for a genetic association between PPP2CA on 5q31.1 and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) across multi-ancestral cohorts, but failed to find significant evidence for an association in the Han Chinese population.
T cells from patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) express high levels of the catalytic subunit of PP2A (PP2Ac).
T cells from patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) express increased amounts of PP2Ac, which contributes to decreased production of interleukin-2 (IL-2).
The envelope glycoprotein gp70 of endogenous retroviruses implicated in murine lupus nephritis is secreted by hepatocytes and its expression is controlled by Sgp3 (serum gp70 production 3) and Sgp4 loci derived from lupus-prone mice.
The endogenous retroviral envelope glycoprotein, gp70, implicated in murine lupus nephritis is secreted by hepatocytes, and its expression is largely regulated by the Sgp3 (serum gp70 production 3) locus derived from lupus-prone mice.
Moreover, the demonstration that TLR7 is involved in the acute phase expression of serum gp70 uncovers an additional pathogenic role of TLR7 in murine lupus nephritis by promoting the expression of nephritogenic gp70 autoantigen.
Our results uncovered an additional pathogenic role of TLR7 and TLR9 in murine lupus nephritis by promoting the expression of nephritogenic gp70 autoantigen.
TLR9-deficient B6.Nba2 mice displayed increased production of autoantibodies against nuclear antigens, serum retroviral gp70 and glomerular matrix antigens, and developed a markedly accelerated form of lupus nephritis.
The endogenous retroviral envelope glycoprotein, gp70, implicated in murine lupus nephritis is secreted by hepatocytes as an acute phase protein, and it has been thought to be a product of an endogenous xenotropic virus, NZB-X1.
However, the protection was not complete, because these mice still developed high titers of anti-chromatin autoantibodies and retroviral gp70-anti-gp70 immune complexes, and severe lupus nephritis, which was not the case in male B6.Nba2 mice lacking the Yaa mutation.
High levels of the retroviral envelope protein gp70 and gp70 immune complexes have been linked to a single locus on chromosome 13 (Bxs6) in the BXSB model, to which linkage of nephritis was also seen.
The presence of retinopathy or polyneuropathy did not differ across RBP4 quartiles.
Next generation sequencing showed BRAF V600E mutation in the primary papillary carcinoma and NRAS Q61R mutation in the primary follicular carcinoma and bony metastasis.
NGS revealed a BRAF p.K601E mutation in both the clear cell papillary carcinoma and poorly differentiated carcinoma and a KRAS p.G12R mutation in the papillary carcinoma, follicular variant.
No mutations including BRAF and KRAS were seen in the conventional papillary carcinoma.
Novel BRAF and KRAS mutations were identified in two of three tumors suggesting that mutations in PCSO may differ from those commonly identified in papillary carcinoma of the eutopic thyroid.
Total mutations found in the FNA and in the corresponding histological specimen in both series were: one PAX8/PPARG rearrangement in a follicular carcinoma (FC), four NRAS mutations [in two FCs, one papillary carcinoma and one follicular adenoma (FA)] and one HRAS mutation in one FA.
Sixteen patients with genotyped LCA (having the CRB1, CRX, RetGC, RPE65, and AIPL1 mutations) were recruited from one ophthalmology practice and examined for the presence of keratoconus.
The phenotype of LCA in patients with AIPL1 mutations is relatively severe, with a maculopathy in most patients and keratoconus and cataract in a large subset.
Less is known about PON3; however, recent experiments with PON3 knockout mice show them to be susceptible to obesity, gallstone formation and atherosclerosis.
The aim of the present study was to investigate the effect of streptozotocin-induced diabetes mellitus and lipoic acid treatment on serum paraoxonase-1 and paraoxonase-3 protein levels and paraoxonase, arylesterase and lactonase activities.36 rats were equally and randomly divided into 4 groups as control, lipoic acid, diabetes and diabetes+lipoic acid.
Serum paraoxonase, arylesterase and lactonase activities were determined by the measuring initial rate of substrate (paraoxon, phenylacetate and dihydrocoumarin) hydrolysis.Streptozotocin-induced diabetes mellitus caused a significant decrease whereas lipoic acid treatment caused a significant increase in serum PON1 and PON3 protein levels and paraoxonase, arylesterase and lactonase activities.
The increase percent of serum PON3 protein was higher than that of serum PON1 protein and the increase percent of serum lactonase activity was higher than that of serum paraoxonase and arylesterase activities in diabetes+lipoic acid group.We can report that, like PON1 protein, PON3 protein and actually its lactonase activity may also have a role as an antioxidant in diabetes mellitus and lipoic acid treatment may be useful for the prevention of the atherosclerotic complications of diabetes by increasing serum PON1 and PON3 protein levels and serum enzyme activities.
Our study suggests a role for PON3 in the metabolism of lipid and bile acid as well as protection against atherosclerosis, gallstone disease, and obesity.
Flash frozen brain tissue of a series of 20 pathologically confirmed MSA patients [9 olivopontocerebellar atrophy (OPCA) type, 6 striatonigral degeneration (SND) type, and 5 mixed type] was used for this study.
Multiple system atrophy (MSA) is a sporadic neurodegenerative disorder that encompasses olivopontocerebellar atrophy (OPCA), striatonigral degeneration (SND) and Shy-Drager syndrome (SDS).
Multiple system atrophy (MSA) is a sporadic neurodegenerative disorder that encompasses olivopontocerebellar atrophy (OPCA), striatonigral degeneration (SND) and Shy-Drager syndrome (SDS).
Multiple system atrophy (MSA) is a sporadic neurodegenerative disorder that encompasses olivopontocerebellar atrophy (OPCA), striatonigral degeneration (SND) and Shy-Drager syndrome (SDS).
Multiple system atrophy (MSA), a sporadic progressive synucleinopathy of advanced age, is separated into two clinic opathological subtypes: MSA-P (striatonigral degeneration [SND]) with predominant parkinsonian features and MSA-C (olivopontocerebellar atrophy [OPCA]) with predominant cerebellar ataxia.
Multiple system atrophy (MSA) has varying clinical (MSA-P versus MSA-C) and pathological [striatonigral degeneration (SND) versus olivopontocerebellar atrophy (OPCA)] phenotypes.
The subjects were 28 patients with MSA (14 striato-nigral degeneration; SND, 14 olivo-ponto-cerebellar atrophy; OPCA.
We divided the patients into three clinical subtypes according to initial and predominant symptoms: 14 with olivopontocerebellar atrophy (OPCA), eight with the Shy-Drager syndrome (SDS) and seven with striatonigral degeneration (SND).
MSA is a sporadic degenerative disease that occurs in striatonigral degeneration (SND), SDS and most cases of sporadic OPCA.
Notably, samples from patients suffering from chronic inflammatory bowel disease (Crohn's disease, CD; ulcerative coliltis, UC) or autoimmune gastritis revealed variable amounts of cathepsin W-expressing cells.
In autoimmune gastritis, cathepsin W-expressing cells made up for 65% of all CD45+ cells, whereas the corresponding values for CD and UC were 11% and 6%, respectively.
The major complications included intraoperative posterior capsular tear in 3 cases, secondary glaucoma due to residual cortex in 2 cases, posterior capsular opacity in 7 cases, cystoid macular edema in 1 case, and retinal detachment in 1 case.
The present study was conducted to determine the clinical relationship between HSP27 and atrial fibrillation (AF).
Circulating ANGPTL2 is increased in chronic kidney disease (CKD), where the risk of CVD is amplified.
The positive association between post-KTx ANGPTL2, aortic stiffness and mortality, suggests that ANGPTL2 may play a biological role in CKD-related CVD.
Furthermore, ANGPTL2 deficiency in a mouse unilateral ureteral obstruction model significantly reduced renal fibrosis by decreasing TGF-Beta1 signal amplification in kidney.
demonstrated that genetic depletion of Angptl2 confers amelioration of the mouse kidney fibrosis induced by a unilateral ureteral obstruction, implicating that ANGPTL2, predominantly in the renal tubular compartments, activates the transforming growth factor-Beta signaling and vice versa through miR-221.
The aim of this study was to investigate the relationship between serum Angptl2 level and chronic kidney disease (CKD).
The age- and sex-adjusted ORs for the presence of CKD increased with higher serum Angptl2 level.
Elevated serum Angptl2 is associated with the likelihood of CKD in the general population.
In conclusion, we propose that metabolic regulation of the Kv2.1/Kv9.3 heteromultimer may play an important role in hypoxic PA vasoconstriction and in the possible development of PA hypertension.
Monoclonal antibodies to human complement component C9 were used to localise the membrane attack complex (MAC) of human complement on muscle fibres from patients with autoimmune myositis.
Thus, eosinophil trafficking to the heart is dependent on the eotaxin-CCR3 pathway in a mouse model of EAM and associated with cardiac eotaxin expression in patients with eosinophilic myocarditis.
Interleukin (IL)-5, RANTES and CC chemokine receptor 3 (CCR3) are essential for induction of eosinophil recruitment in organs, but the precise pathogenesis of eosinophilic myocarditis is still unclear.
Eosinophilic myocarditis was usually associated with animals having several degenerative changes in myocardial cells, and IL-5, RANTES and CCR3 expressions were usually present in these eosinophils (p &lt; 0.05).
Farber disease (MIM 228000) is a rare autosomal recessive condition caused by deficiency of lysosomal acid ceramidase (EC 3.5.1.23).
The specific activity of acid ceramidase (N-acylsphingosine deacylase, EC 3.5.1.23) was measured at pH4.5 in normal fibroblasts and in fibroblasts from patients with Farber disease and obligate heterozygotes.
Laxity of skin and tissue over the tarsal plate and spasm of the orbicular muscle along the lid margin lead to senile entropion.
The tested material was mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) isolated from specimens of ductal carcinoma (carcinoma ductale) Tp1-2Np0-1Mp0, blood and non-cancerous tissue of mammary gland (control), sampled from 50 patients who had been operated for breast cancer.
The present case-control study was conducted to determine the influence of ADH2, ADH3 and ALDH2 polymorphisms in Fukuoka, Japan, with 685 incident cases of histologically confirmed colorectal adenocarcinomas and 778 community controls selected randomly from the study area.
The SPINK1 N34S polymorphism was detected in 5 of 172 (2.9%) patients with chronic pancreatitis, in 4 of 200 (2.0%) patients with sporadic pancreatic adenocarcinoma, in 0 of 36 (0%) of patients with familial pancreatic cancer and in 3 of 177 (1.7%) controls of chronic cholecystitis.
Recent biochemical investigations fuel the hope that inhibition of DHCR24, resulting in an accumulation of desmosterol, can open new therapeutic options for treating hepatitis C virus infections, certain forms of cancer and atherosclerosis.
However, the function of DHCR24 in endometrial cancer (EC) remains largely elusive.
Here, we analyzed the expression profile of DHCR24 and the progesterone receptor (PGR) in our tissue microarray of EC (n = 258), the existing EC database in GEO (Gene Expression Omnibus), and TCGA (The Cancer Genome Atlas).
Furthermore, genetically silencing DHCR24 inhibited the metastatic ability of endometrial cancer cells and up-regulated PGR expression, which made cells more sensitive to progestin.
In addition, PCAT1 interacts with AR and LSD1 and is required for their recruitment to the enhancers of GNMT and DHCR24, two androgen late-response genes implicated in prostate cancer development and progression.
Herein, we investigated whether serum 3Beta-hydroxysterol Delta24-reductase antibody (DHCR24 Ab) may serve as a prognostic marker for hepatitis C infection progression to hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
Over-expression of receptor interacting protein 140 (RIP140) suppressed thyroid hormone (T3) induction of cellular retinoic acid binding I protein (CRABPI) gene in P19 embryonal carcinoma cells.
The present study was set up to examine the possible effects of alcohol on cellular RA binding protein I (CRABP-I) expression during embryonic development by using transgenic mouse embryos and P19 embryonal carcinoma cells as experimental models.
The regulation of mouse cellular retinoic acid-binding protein-I (CRABP-I) gene expression by the retinoids and thyroid hormones was examined, by using a beta-galactosidase (lacZ) reporter gene and a CRABP-I specific antibody, in transgenic mouse embryos and a mouse embryonal carcinoma cell line P19.
The promoter and its upstream regulatory region of the mouse cellular retinoic acid-binding protein I (crabp-I) gene were examined in transgenic mouse embryos, a mouse embryonal carcinoma cell line P19, and a mouse embryonic fibroblast cell line 3T6.
Cellular retinoic acid-binding protein-I (CRABP-I) gene expression is induced in mouse embryonal carcinoma P19 cells specifically by retinoic acid (RA) and the induction is enhanced by sphinganine.
The neuropathic groups did not differ in duration of diabetes onset (DG = 13 years +/- 8; UDG = 14 years +/- 5; P = 0.243) and they presented similar mean for symptoms according to MNSI score (DG = 6.94 +/- 1.81; UDG = 6.78 +/- 2.44; P = 0.352).
We also sequenced eight genes (AICDA, BTK, CD40, CD154, NEMO, TACI, SH2D1A, UNG) implicated in immunoglobulin deficiency in 19 Waldenstroem's macroglobulinemia patients with IgA and/or IgG hypogammaglobulinemia.
A missense mutation in the highly conserved catalytic site of UNG was observed in a patient with hypogammaglobulinemia, warranting further study of this pathway in Waldenstroem's macroglobulinemia.
HMGB1, MICB, PSMB8, PSMB2, PSME2, HDAC1, HDAC2 and DNMT3B showed consistent down regulation of gene expression in melioidosis patients compared to other sepsis infection, irrespective of comorbidities such as diabetes, duration of clinical symptoms and antibiotic treatment.
Thirty patients with upper abdominal pain requiring narcotic analgesia and suspected or known intra-abdominal malignancy were selected for EUS CPN.
Pepsinogen A, combined with pepsinogen C or gastrin, should be the first option in evaluating patients with suspected cobalamin deficiency who have not previously undergone gastrointestinal surgery.
No statistically significant trends were seen between serum inflammatory markers and risk of penile cancer, but higher albumin levels increased the risk of testicular cancer [HR for albumin (g/L): 1.10 (95% CI: 1.03-1.18)].
Interestingly, CDK12 protein absence was associated with reduced expression of a number of DDR proteins including ATR, Ku70/Ku80, PARP1, DNA-PK and gamma-H2AX, suggesting a novel mechanism of CDK12 associated DDR dysregulation in breast cancer.
In this study, we identified XRCC5 as a binding protein of the COX-2 gene promoter in colon cancer cells with streptavidin-agarose pulldown assay and mass spectrometry analysis, and found that XRCC5 promoted colon cancer growth through modulation of COX-2 signaling.
Knockdown of XRCC5 by siRNAs inhibited the growth of colon cancer cells in vitro and of tumor xenografts in a mouse model in vivo by suppressing COX-2 promoter activity and COX-2 protein expression.
Conversely, overexpression of XRCC5 promoted the growth of colon cancer cells by activating COX-2 promoter and increasing COX-2 protein expression.
Immunofluorescence assay and confocal microscopy showed that XRCC5 and p300 proteins were co-located in the nucleus of colon cancer cells.
Co-immunoprecipitation assay also proved the interaction between XRCC5 and p300 in nuclear proteins of colon cancer cells.
Cell viability assay indicated that the overexpression of wild-type p300, but not its histone acetyltransferase (HAT) domain deletion mutant, increased XRCC5 acetylation, thereby up-regulated COX-2 expression and promoted the growth of colon cancer cells.
Taken together, our results demonstrated that XRCC5 promoted colon cancer growth by cooperating with p300 to regulate COX-2 expression, and suggested that the XRCC5/p300/COX-2 signaling pathway was a potential target in the treatment of colon cancers.
The purpose of this study was to evaluate the effect of 50-Hz electromagnetic field (EMF) in combination with CDDP and bleomycin (Bleo) on expression of some of DNA repair genes (GADD45A, XRCC1, XRCC4, Ku70, Ku80, DNA-PKcs and LIG4) in MCF-7 (breast cancer) and SH-SY5Y (neuroblastoma) cell lines.
Moreover, diarrhea occurrence, antigen-specific IgE and intestinal mastocytosis were comparable between WT and IL-4RAlfa(Y500F) mice.
Cutaneous eosinophilia persisted in Sharpin(-/-) , Il4ra(-/-) mice, although expression of Il5 mRNA was reduced and the expression of Ccl11 and Ccl24 was completely abolished.
Th cell-specific deletion of Il4ra attenuated Th2 responses and abolished the immunopathophysiology upon reinfection, including airway hyper-reactivity, eosinophilia, and mucus hyperproduction in mice infected initially as neonates.
Deletion of IL-4Ralpha abolished transient mucous secretory cell (MuSC) abundance and eosinophilia normally observed in neonatal wild-type mice.
These studies demonstrate that: 1) normal neonatal mouse airway development entails an IL-4Ralpha-dependent, transient abundance of MuSC and eosinophils; 2) absence of IL-4Ralpha improved neonatal survival of Scnn1b-Tg mice, likely reflecting decreased formation of asphyxiating mucus plugs; and 3) in Scnn1b-Tg mice, neutrophilia, mucus obstruction, and airspace enlargement are IL-4Ralpha- and TNF-alpha-independent, and only MuSC and eosinophilia are sensitive to glucocorticoids.
Homeobox (HOX) transcript antisense RNA (HOTAIR), a long intergenic noncoding RNA (lincRNA), has been reported to play an oncogenic role in various cancers including small cell lung cancer (SCLC).
Homeobox (HOX) transcript antisense intergenic RNA (HOTAIR), a long non-coding RNA (lncRNA), is associated with a variety of human cancers, such as breast, liver and lung cancer.
Furthermore, glial fibrillary acidic protein levels were significantly different between haemorrhagic stroke and ischaemic stroke patients (MD 224.58 ng l-1; 95% CI 25.84, 423.32; P= 0.03), high levels of admission glucose were a strong predictor of poor prognosis after ischaemic stroke and symptomatic intracerebral haemorrhage post-thrombolysis, glutamate was found to be an indicator of progressive (unstable) stroke (MD 172.65 mymol l-1, 95% CI 130.54, 214.75; P= 0.00001), D-dimer predicted in-hospital death (MD 0.67 myg ml-1, 95% CI 0.35, 1.00; P= 0.0001), and high fibrinogen levels were associated with poor outcome at 3 months (MD 47.90 mg l-1, 95% CI 14.88, 80.93; P= 0.004) following ischaemic stroke.
Microalbuminuria (20-200 mg L-1) was present in 7.2% of the subjects and independently associated with age, gender, hypertension, diabetes, smoking, previous myocardial infarction and stroke.
There was a high morbidity from diabetes and other conditions: the prevalence of hypertension (untreated blood pressure of 160/95 mmHg or more or antihypertensive medication) was 52%, of stroke 5%, of nephropathy (urinary albumin concentration greater than or equal to 300 mg l-1) 3%, of lower limb amputations 4%, and of foot ulcers 7%.
Desmoglein 2 (Dsg2), an adhesion molecule of desmosomes and the only Dsg isoform expressed in enterocytes, is required for epithelial barrier properties and may contribute to barrier defects in Crohn's disease.
Offspring of mothers with NLRP5 mutations have heterogenous clinical and epigenetic features, but cases include a discordant monozygotic twin pair, individuals with idiopathic developmental delay and autism, and families affected by infertility and reproductive wastage.
Tandem repeats of a novel, putative, zinc-binding motif (MYM) have been described within the products of two, highly homologous genes: ZNF198/RAMP/FIM and ZNF261/DXS6673E.
Furthermore, very little has been reported for the targeting of nanomedicines to lymph node metastases (LNMs) of prostate cancer.
We here report the simple and aqueous coating of iron oxide nanoparticles (IONPs) with FA for theranostics of LNMs of prostate cancer.
We also show that FA-IONPs are specifically uptaken by prostate cancer cells expressing the prostate specific membrane antigen, including LNMs cells.
Our study provides a theranostic platform for targeting LNMs of prostate cancer with high potential for their detection by MRI and treatment by hyperthermia.
A total of 88 primary breast cancer, 91 LNMs, 54 intraductal carcinoma and 26 normal adjacent breast tissue samples from tissue microarrays were studied.
Even though it was not significant, moesin expression varied between primary tumors, intraductal carcinoma, normal breast adjacent tissue and LNMs.
According to the seventh edition of tumour-node-metastasis (TNM) classification, pN3a status in breast cancer patients consists of presence of an infraclavicular lymph node metastasis (LNM) and/or presence of &gt;=10 axillary LNMs.
To evaluate the frequency of TERT promoter (TERTp), BRAF, and NRAS mutations in metastatic thyroid carcinomas, analyzing primary thyroid tumors, lymph node metastases (LNMs), and distant metastases.
Mutation analysis was performed in 437 tissue samples from 204 patients, mainly with papillary thyroid carcinomas (PTCs; n = 180), including 196 LNMs and 56 distant metastases.
Arterial blood gas showed Type 1 Respiratory Failure (p02 was only 10 kPa on 4 L per minute of oxygen).
Previously, we showed that histamine-releasing factor (HRF), a multifunctional protein secreted during allergy, interacts with a subset of IgE molecules and that the HRF dimer activates mast cells in an HRF-reactive IgE-dependent manner.
In this study, we investigated whether HRF plays any role in food allergy.
Specifically, we determined that prophylactic and therapeutic administration of HRF inhibitors that block HRF-IgE interactions reduces the incidence of diarrhea and mastocytosis in a murine model of food allergy.
Food allergy-associated intestinal inflammation was accompanied by increased secretion of the HRF dimer into the intestine in response to proinflammatory, Th2, and epithelial-derived cytokines and HRF-reactive IgE levels at the elicitation phase.
Consistent with these data, patients with egg allergy had higher blood levels of HRF-reactive IgE compared with individuals that were not hypersensitive.
Successful oral immunotherapy in egg-allergy patients and food-allergic mice reduced HRF-reactive IgE levels, thereby suggesting a pathological role for HRF in food allergy.
Together, these results suggest that antigen and HRF dimer amplify intestinal inflammation by synergistically activating mast cells and indicate that HRF has potential as a therapeutic target in food allergy.
provide a causal link between histamine-releasing factor (HRF) interactions with IgE and food allergy in a murine model.
These results support a role for HRF-IgE interactions in the amplification of intestinal inflammation and suggest HRF as a therapeutic target in food allergy.
Fortilin facilitates the development of atherosclerosis, contributes to both systemic and pulmonary arterial hypertension, participates in the development of cancers, and worsens diabetic nephropathy.
Further translational research could prove fortilin to be a viable molecular target for treatment of various human diseases including and not limited to atherosclerosis, hypertension, certain tumors, diabetes mellitus, diabetic nephropathy, hepatic injury, and aberrant immunity and host defense.
Among eyes with DME, those with submacular fluid, no HRF, and a continuous IS-OS layer responded better to DEX implants than those without these features.
HRFs included hydronephrosis, abnormal examination under anesthesia, lymphovascular invasion, or variant histology.
MAb 9E1 significantly decreases invasion in pancreatic, lung squamous and breast cancer cells and silencing of its target antigen, which was revealed as AnxA6, leads to markedly reduced invasive capacity of pancreatic and lung squamous cancer in vitro.
In pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, high AnxA6 IHC score correlated with the presence of tumour budding at the invasive front of tumours (P=0.082), the presence of perineural invasion (P= &lt;0.0001) and showed a weak correlation with reduced survival (P=0.2242).
Moreover, through characterisation of the 9E1 target antigen, AnxA6, our findings support further investigation of AnxA6 as a potential candidate target for antibody-mediated inhibition of pancreatic cancer.
In addition, we observed the positive association between blood BPA levels and mRNA expression of the ANXA6 and VCP not in normal but thyroid cancer tissues.
Our study provides ANXA6 and VCP as proteomic biomarkers for BPA- early life exposure and their potential for women's thyroid cancer.
More recently, we and others identified roles for AnxA6 in cancer cell migration and invasion.
Formation of the ANXA6/LRP1/TSP1 complex was restricted to cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) and required physiopathologic culture conditions that improved tumor cell survival and migration.
The current study shows that AnxA6 is specifically reduced in human hepatocellular carcinoma suggesting a role of this protein in hepatocarcinogenesis.
The expression levels of AnxA6 are closely associated with melanoma, cervical cancer, epithelial carcinoma, breast cancer, gastric cancer, prostate cancer, acute lymphoblastic leukemia, chronic myeloid leukemia, large-cell lymphoma and myeloma.
AnxA6 exhibits dual functions in cancer, acting either as a tumor suppressor or promoter, depending on the type of cancer and the degree of malignancy.
In several types of cancer, AnxA6 acts via Ras, Ras/MAPK and/or FAK/PI3K signaling pathways by mainly mediating PKCAlfa, p120GAP, Bcr-Abl and YY1.
In the present review, the roles of AnxA6 in different types of cancer are summarized.
Here, we studied the effects of NO synthesis inhibition during the induction phase of morphine dependence on the expression of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), glial-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF), nerve growth factor (NGF), and insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1) as well as their receptors in rat brain regions after spontaneous morphine withdrawal in dependent animals.
(2) The occurrence rate of the heat-sensitized acupoints was high in the site of Xiaguan (ST 7) and Sibai (ST 2), and was secondarily high in the site of Jiachengjiang (Extra), Fengchi (GB 20) and Yuyao (EX-HN 4) in the high incidence region of heat sensitization in patients with trigeminal neuralgia.
A quantitative assessment of the density of the protein gene product 9.5 (PGP9.5), the neural cell adhesion molecule (NCAM), and the low-affinity nerve growth factor receptor (NGFR) expressing nerve fibers in the circular muscle layer in the colon was carried out by morphometric analyses from 13 patients with Hirschsprung's disease (HD).
The elevation of culture temperatures of C6 cells that were persistently infected with the Lec strain of the subacute sclerosing panencephalitis (SSPE) virus (C6/SSPE) resulted in immediate selective inhibition of membrane (M) protein synthesis.
The sensitivity of newborn hamsters to inoculation with the vaccine L-16 strain of measles virus and the Lec strain isolated from a patient with subacute sclerosing panencephalitis as well as the possibility of persistence of these viruses in the animals were studied.
This endothelin 1-induced Ca2+ signal was not observed when the cells were persistently infected with a measles virus strain of subacute sclerosing panencephalitis (SSPE, strain Lec).
Establishment and characteristics of a baby hamster kidney cell line (BHK 0-853) persistently infected with a subacute sclerosing panencephalitis (SSPE) strain of measles virus (Lec strain) is described.
The DRAIC lncRNA was identified from RNA-seq data and is downregulated as prostate cancer cells progress from an androgen-dependent (AD) to a castration-resistant (CR) state.
Prostate cancers persisting in patients after androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) select for decreased DRAIC expression, and higher levels of DRAIC in prostate cancer are associated with longer disease-free survival (DFS).
The decrease of FOXA1 and NKX3-1, and aberrant activation of AR, thus accounts for the decrease of DRAIC during prostate cancer progression to the CR state.
Taken together, these findings reveal that SC79 could accelerate the recovery of reversible muscular atrophy induced by BTX and subsequently promote fracture healing through activation of the Akt signaling pathway, which suggests its therapeutic potential in orthopedics.
Moreover, rhPDGF-BB promoted the proliferation of hADSCs via miR-363/PI3K/Akt pathway, indicating that rhPDGF-BB combined with ADSCs could treat Achilles tendinitis via miR-363/PI3K/Akt pathway.
Immunohistochemical staining using cholangiocarcinoma tissues showed that the expression of Ambra1 positively correlated with the expression of Snail, one of the major transcriptional factors of EMT.
Tumors of blood and lymph vessel origin accounted for nine patients; giant-cell tumors of tendon sheaths and tumoral calcinosis occurred in four patients each and soft-tissue chondroma in three.
DEAF-1 is an important transcriptional regulator that is required for embryonic development and is linked to clinical depression and suicidal behavior in humans.
The serotonin 1A receptor (5-HT1A) and its associated transcriptional regulators, five prime repressor element under dual repression (Freud-1) and nuclear-deformed epidermal autoregulatory factor (NUDR/Deaf-1) have been previously found to be the repressors for 5-HT1A in the serotonergic raphe neurons, and are also altered in postmortem brains of individuals with major depressive disorder (MDD) and in rats exposed to chronic restraint stress.
Deformed epidermal autoregulatory factor-1 (DEAF-1) is a DNA-binding protein required for embryonic development and linked to clinical depression and suicidal behavior in humans.
This metabolic syndrome represents a "Cluster" of metabolic disorders and cardiovascular risk factors which has been collected and summarized by the author and such a cluster includes: insulin resistance/hyperinsulinemia, central obesity, glucose intolerance/DM, atherogenic dyslipidemia (increase TG, decrease HDL-cholesterol, increase Apo-B, increase small dense LDL), hypertension, prothrombotic state (increase PAI-1, increase F-VII, increase fibrinogen, increase vWF, increase adhesion molecules), endothelial dysfunction, hyperuricemia, and increased hsC-RP and cytokines.
The mortality rates for esophageal declined from 1994 to 2002 (APC -2.5 (95% CI -4.1 to -0.8)) and from 2002 to 2013 (APC -5.2 (95% CI -5.7 to -4.7)) and laryngeal cancer declined from 1995 to 2013 (average annual percent change (AAPC): -3.3 (95% CI -4.7 to -1.8)).
Trends in background rates were notable for liver (APC 5.6%) and lung (-3.2%) cancers.
The increase for small primary tonsillar cancer from 2004 to 2008 is associated with increased ipsilateral disease (ie, T1-2N2a-b, APC 10.6%; p &lt; .05) rather than bilateral neck disease (T1-2N2c, APC 5.9%, APC = NS).
While laryngeal cancer mortality rates decreased among men (APC -5.5%) and women (APC -0.03%) alike, incidence rates decreased (-1.28%) among men but not among women (3.95%).
The aim of this study was to investigate the potential roles of Protein Kinase C Zeta (PRKCZ) in ovarian cancer.
Herein, we observe a significant increase in cell survival upon PRKCZ over-expression in SKOV3 ovarian cancer cells; additionally, when the cells are treated with small interference RNA (siRNA) targeting PRKCZ, the motility of SKOV3 cells decreased.
However, the in vivo role of PKCZeta and its mechanisms of action in prostate cancer remain unclear.
Here we demonstrate that the genetic inactivation of PKCZeta in mice results in invasive prostate carcinoma in vivo in the context of phosphatase and tensin homolog deficiency.
Bioinformatic analysis of human prostate cancer gene-expression sets revealed increased c-Myc transcriptional activity in PKCZeta-inactive cells, which correlated with increased cell growth, invasion, and metastasis.
Analysis of prostate cancer samples demonstrated increased expression and decreased phosphorylation of c-Myc at Ser-373 in PKCZeta knockout tumors.
Collectively, these results establish PKCZeta as an important tumor suppressor and regulator of c-Myc function in prostate cancer.
Previously, using gene-knockdown techniques together with genome expression array analysis, we showed the gene protein Kinase C (PKC)-zeta (PRKCZ) to mediate the malignant phenotype of human prostate cancer.
A novel sequence was identified within the 3'-terminal domain of human PRKCZ that, in prostate cancer cell lines and tissues, is expressed during transcription and thereafter translated into protein (designated PKC-Zeta(-PrC)) independent of conventional PKC-Zeta(-a).
Thirty-eight PPARGamma direct target genes were found to be involved in prostate cancer and two key (hub) PPARGamma direct target genes, PRKCZ and PGK1, were experimentally validated to be repressed upon PPARGamma activation by its natural ligand, 15d-PGJ(2) in three prostrate cancer cell lines.
We proposed that PRKCZ and PGK1 could be novel therapeutic targets for prostate cancer.
The role that PKCzeta, PKClambda/iota, and Par-4 have in lung and prostate cancer in vivo and in humans will be extensively covered in this article, as will the multifunctional role of p62 as a novel hub in cell signaling during cancer and inflammation, and the mechanistic details and controversial data published on its potential role in aggregate formation and signaling.
In lung tissue from pulmonary fibrosis patients with relatively normal lung function, lumican is present at low levels throughout the tissue, whereas patients with advanced disease have pronounced lumican expression in the fibrotic lesions.
Transcripts with increased expression included fibronectin, lumican, thrombospondin and collagen types I and VIII, each of which has been reported upregulated in pulmonary fibrosis.
Intent-to-treat analyses indicated that SEPA decreased positive urine samples for Chlamydia; improved condom use, decreased substance abuse and IPV; improved communication with partner, improved HIV-related knowledge, improved intentions to use condoms, decreased barriers to condom use, and increased community prevention attitudes.
The results indicate that IL-6 expression is essential for angiotensin II-induced increases in retinal VEGF expression, leukostasis, and vascular remodeling.
Although high expression and prognostic value of TMEM45A has been recently reported in various types of human tumors, the association of TMEM45A expression and glioma is still unknown.
Here, we reported that TMEM45A was significantly overexpressed in glioma tissues compared to non-tumorous brain tissues.
Furthermore, TMEM45A mRNA levels were gradually increased with the increasing severity of histological grade of glioma.
Moreover, high TMEM45A expression level was correlated with short survival time of glioma patients.
Down-regulation of TMEM45A in two glioma cell lines, U251 and U373 by transected with TMEM45A siRNA resulted in a significant reduction of cell proliferation and G1-phase arrest.
Additionally, we found that suppressing of TMEM45A expression in glioma cells remarkably suppressed cell migration and cell invasion.
More importantly, TMEM45A siRNA treatment significantly down-regulated the proteins promoting cell cycles transition (Cyclin D1, CDK4 and PCNA) and cell invasion (MMP-2 and MMP-9), which indicted a possible mechanism underlying its functions on glioma.
In summary, our study suggests that TMEM45A may work as an oncogene and a new effective therapeutic target for glioma treatment.
The association of TMEM45A with various cancers has been recently reported.
However, the biological function of TMEM45A in ovarian cancer remains unclear.
The present study aimed to elucidate the role of TMEM45A in regulating the biological behavior of ovarian cancer cells.
We compared the expression of TMEM45A between ovarian cancer tissues and normal tissues based on RNA-sequencing data of the ovarian cancer cohort from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) project and our real-time PCR data from 25 pairs of ovarian cancer and their matched non-cancerous tissue samples.
The expression of TMEM45A was then suppressed in two ovarian cancer cell lines, HO-8910 and A2780, by RNA interference.
TCGA data and our real-time PCR results demonstrated the overexpression of TMEM45A in ovarian cancer.
In conclusion, TMEM45A may function as an oncogene for ovarian cancer, and inhibition of TMEM45A may be a therapeutic strategy for ovarian cancer.
We report that a 14-amino acid peptide derived from transmembrane protein 45A shows multimodal inhibition of lymphangiogenesis and angiogenesis in breast cancer.
TMEM45A expression was increased both in MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer cells and in HepG2 human hepatoma cells in conditions where protection of cells against apoptosis induced by chemotherapeutic agents was observed, i.e.
Kaplan Meier curve showed an association between high TMEM45A expression and poor prognostic in breast cancer patients.
High levels of TMEM45A expression in tumors may be indicative of potential resistance to cancer therapy, making TMEM45A an interesting biomarker for resistance.
Progression of xenografts to invasive breast cancer was dramatically increased by suppressing four genes that were usually elevated in clinical samples of DCIS, including a protease inhibitor (CSTA) and genes involved in cell adhesion and signaling (FAT1, DST, and TMEM45A), strongly suggesting that they normally function to suppress progression.
Here, we report that a previously unidentified target of miR-93, neural precursor cell expressed developmentally downregulated gene 4-like (NEDD4L), is able to mediate TGF-Beta-mediated EMT in lung cancer cells.
We next demonstrated that the downregulation of NEDD4L enhanced, while overexpression of NEDD4L reduced TGF-Beta signaling, reflected by increased phosphorylation of SMAD2 in the lung cancer cell line after TGF-Beta treatment.
Furthermore, overexpression of miR-93 in lung cancer cells promoted TGF-Beta-induced EMT through downregulation of NEDD4L.
The analysis of publicly available gene expression array datasets indicates that low NEDD4L expression correlates with poor outcomes among patients with lung cancer, further supporting the oncogenic role of miR-93 in lung tumorigenesis and metastasis.
Recent studies have demonstrated that the neural precursor cell expressed, developmentally downregulated 4-like (Nedd4L) gene plays a role in the progression of various cancers.
However, reports describing Nedd4L expression in ovarian cancer tissues are limited.
A cohort (n = 117) of archival formalin-fixed, paraffin embedded resected normal ovarian epithelial tissues (n = 10), benign ovarian epithelial tumor tissues (n = 10), serous borderline ovarian epithelial tumor tissues (n = 14), mucous borderline ovarian epithelial tumor tissues (n = 11), and invasive ovarian epithelial cancer tissues (n = 72) were assessed for Nedd4L protein expression using immunohistochemistry.
Nedd4L protein expression was significantly decreased in invasive ovarian epithelial cancer tissues compared to non-cancer tissues (P &lt; 0.05).
Nedd4L protein expression may be an independent prognostic marker of ovarian cancer development.
Given that NEDD4L plays an important role in constraining transforming growth factor Beta signaling by targeting activated Smad2/Smad3 for degradation, we investigated the role of DDB2 in the regulation of TGF-Beta signaling in ovarian cancer cells.
The study has uncovered an unappreciated regulatory mode that hinges on the interaction between DDB2 and NEDD4L in human ovarian cancer cells.
CD56(bright)CD16(-) NK cells isolated from the synovial fluid of juvenile idiopathic arthritis patients failed to inhibit autologous CD4(+) T cell proliferation.
The adenovirus E1A 243R oncoprotein targets TRRAP, a scaffold protein that assembles histone acetyltransferase (HAT) complexes, such as the NuA4/Tip60 complex which mediates transcriptional activity of the proto-oncogene MYC and helps determine the cancer cell phenotype.
This study was designed to assess the protein levels of transformation/transcription domain-associated protein (TRRAP) in invasive ductal breast carcinomas, and investigated the association between TRRAP and the clinicopathological features of breast cancer.
We examined TRRAP protein expression in 470 breast cancer tissues and normal breast tissues by tissue microarray to study the correlation between TRRAP expression and clinicopathological features.
The data demonstrated that expression of TRRAP was significantly lower in breast carcinomas (36.6%) than in corresponding normal breast tissues (50.8%).
Univariate analyses identified TRRAP and progesterone receptor as independent protective factors for breast cancer prognosis.
The findings indicate a significant correlation between TRRAP protein levels and adverse prognosis in breast cancer.
Therefore, TRRAP could be a prognostic biomarker for breast cancer.
In addition, TRRAP is also a predictive biomarker of breast cancer treatment.
Down-regulation of CDK6 and Cyclin D1 in Tca8113 transfected with miR-9 mimics indicate that the complex formed by both proteins may be the effector of the antiproliferative function of miR-9 in OSCCs.
Moreover, the silencing of GSK3Beta recapitulated the cellular and molecular effects in a similar manner to the overexpression of miR-99b-3p, which included inhibition of OSCC cell proliferation and suppression of p65 (RelA) and G1 regulators (cyclin D1, CDK4 and CDK6) in vitro.
Our data suggest that miR-145 exerts its tumor suppressor function by targeting c-Myc and Cdk6, leading to the inhibition of OSCC cell growth.
Metformin treatment led to a remarkable decrease of cyclin D1, cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) 4 and CDK6 protein levels and phosphorylation of retinoblastoma protein, but did not affect p21 or p27 protein expression in OSCC cells.
The pex1 and pex2 mutations responsible for the effect decrease the precise excision of Tn5 from R100.1 as well as from RP4 genomes.
The drug had a pronounced clinical effect in virtually all forms of lichen planus, which may be due to suppression of the activity of TH1 cells producing inflammatory cytokines and an increase in the functional activity of TH2 cells producing antiinflammatory cytokines and to normalization of the functional activity of T lymphocytes, manifesting by a higher expression of early activation antigen CD69 involved in the production of IL-2.
Separation was achieved with a Waters Atlantis dC18 column (LC-MS) or a Waters SymmetryShield RP18 column connected with an Atlantis dC18 (LC-UV).
Separation was achieved with a SymmetryShield RP18 column and an Atlantis dC18 column using a 10 mM potassium phosphate buffer as mobile phase.
Analyses were performed on a sub-2-mym-particle-size RP-18 column with an acidified (0.02% acetic acid) 12 min water/acetonitrile solvent gradient.
A significant association was found between IL-34 expression and synovitis severity.
A whole genome expression analysis of peripheral blood mononuclear cells yielded 12 protein-coding genes (ADM, APBB3, CD160, CFD, CITED2, CTSZ, IER5, NFKBIZ, NR4A2, NUCKS1, SERTAD1, TNF) that were differentially expressed between 29 unmedicated depressed patients with a mood disorder (8 bipolar disorder, 21 major depressive disorder) and 24 healthy controls (HCs).
CELF1 levels peak in the heart during embryogenesis, and aberrant up-regulation of CELF1 in the adult heart has been implicated in cardiac pathogenesis in myotonic dystrophy type 1, as well as in diabetic cardiomyopathy.
Either inhibition of CELF activity or over-expression of CELF1 in heart muscle causes cardiomyopathy in transgenic mice.
Repression of CELF-mediated splicing activity via expression of a nuclear dominant negative CELF protein in heart muscle was previously shown to induce dysregulation of alternative splicing, cardiac dysfunction, cardiac hypertrophy, and dilated cardiomyopathy in MHC-CELFDelta transgenic mice.
A "mild" line of MHC-CELFDelta mice that expresses a lower level of the dominant negative protein exhibits cardiac dysfunction and myopathy at a young age, but spontaneously recovers normal cardiac function and heart size with age despite the persistence of splicing defects.
Using CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein Delta (C/EBPDelta) KO mice and C2C12 myotubes with knockdown of C/EBPDelta or myostatin, we determined that p-Stat3 initiates muscle wasting via C/EBPDelta, stimulating myostatin, a negative muscle growth regulator.
The pathway from p-Stat3 to C/EBPDelta to myostatin and muscle wasting could identify therapeutic targets that prevent muscle wasting.
The indices of coagulometry and thromboelastography (THEG) were determined in 60 patients, suffering various forms of an acute cholecystitis.
Additionally, sulforaphane reduced the expression of histone deacetylase1, 2, and 3, up-regulated p75 neurotrophin receptor, and increased levels of acetylated histone 3 lysine 9 and acetylated histone 4 lysine 12 in the cerebral cortex of Alzheimer's disease model mice as well as in ABeta-exposed SH-SY5Y cells.
In conclusion, this study demonstrates that sulforaphane can ameliorate neurobehavioral deficits and reduce the ABeta burden in Alzheimer's disease model mice, and the mechanism underlying these effects may be associated with up-regulation of p75 neurotrophin receptor mediated, apparently at least in part, via reducing the expression of histone deacetylase1 and 3.
We assessed the functions of AdipoR1 and AdipoR2 in endometrial cancer cells to determine whether the AMPK/ERK and Akt pathways mediate the effects of adiponectin-induced apoptosis and anti-proliferation.
To clarify the roles of adiponectin receptor (AdipoR) and leptin receptor (ObR) in endometrial carcinoma, the expression of AdipoR-1 and -2 and ObR in endometrial cancer was examined immunohistochemically, and correlations with clinicopathological implications were also analysed.
Paraffin-embedded tissues were obtained from 77 patients with endometrial carcinoma and were stained immunohistochemically using antibodies against AdipoR-1, AdipoR-2 and ObR.
In 77 cases of endometrial cancer, positive expression was observed in 46 cases (59.7%) for AdipoR-1, 47 cases (61.0%) for AdipoR-2 and 33 cases (42.9%) for ObR.
Poor expression of AdipoR-1, thus, appears to be associated with tumour grade, myometrial invasion, adnexal invasion, lymph-vascular space involvement and lymph node metastasis, as well as poor prognosis, in endometrial cancer.
In addition, the expression of adiponectin receptors (AdipoR1 and AdipoR2) has been documented in several human cancer tissues, but the expression has previously not been assessed in human endometrial cancer tissues.
Transcripts for Acrp30 receptors (AdipoR1             and AdipoR2) and leptin receptor (Ob-Rb) were detected by quantitative real-time             RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) in six endometrial cancer cell lines.
Little is known about whether single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the genes that encode adiponectin (ADIPOQ), leptin (LEP), adiponectin receptor 1 (ADIPOR1), adiponectin receptor 2 (ADIPOR2), and leptin receptor (LEPR) are associated with endometrial cancer.
We first examined the expression of adiponectin receptor 1 (AdipoR1) and 2 (AdipoR2) in normal human endometrium and in endometrial cancer tissues ex vivo.
We report for the first time that the relative expression level of AdipoR1 is higher than AdipoR2 in human endometrial cancer tissue, but the expression of AdipoRs is not statistically different from nonneoplastic tissues.
In the present study, we evaluated the role of FAM9C in human hepatocellular carcinoma.
Taken together, our data demonstrate that FAM9C as a novel cancer testis gene plays an anti-apoptotic role in human hepatocellular carcinoma through activating the PI3K/Akt signaling pathway, and serves as a promising target for HCC therapy.
Using cell-based assays with recombinant full-length, conformationally intact MOG, several recent studies have revealed that MOG Abs can be found in a subset of predominantly pediatric patients with acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM), aquaporin-4 (AQP4) seronegative neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders (NMOSD), monophasic or recurrent isolated optic neuritis (ON), or transverse myelitis, in atypical MS and in N-methyl-d-aspartate receptor-encephalitis with overlapping demyelinating syndromes.
During vitrectomy, the ABs were observed to be concentrated in the anterior vitreous cavity, and a complete posterior vitreous detachment (PVD) was present.
New criteria for the diagnosis of multiple sclerosis (MS) and discovery of myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG) or aquaporin-4 (AQP4) antibodies (Abs) have changed the management of optic neuritis (ON).
However, optic neuritis associated with MOG-Abs has not been elucidated using new methods such as cell-based assay.
Serum samples from 70 patients (17 males and 53 females, mean age 43.1 years) with optic neuritis were tested for MOG-Abs by cell-based assay.
MOG-Abs may contribute to the heterogeneous clinical picture of optic neuritis, and although visual acuity outcome is favourable, there is a tendency of residual visual field deficit and a possibility of repeated relapses.
IgG1-Abs to FL-MOG were associated with optic neuritis (n = 11), AQP4-seronegative neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder (n = 4), and acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (n = 1).
Significant increase of both the expression level and DNA binding activity of NF-KB /P65 subunit together with serum HIF-1 alpha levels was noted in HCC patients compared to liver cirrhosis and control subjects, with significant positive correlation with parameters for bad prognosis of HCC.
This outcome suggests that serum miR-21 and miR-106a expression level was closely related with kidney cancer tissue.
Overexpression of tissue factor (TF) has been associated with increased tumor growth, tumor angiogenesis, and metastatic potential in many malignancies, including pancreatic cancer.
To assess correlation of cytokines levels and therapy regimes a relationship of the time course of changes in the cytokines IFN-Gamma, IFN-Alfa, IL-18, and TNF-Alfa to the treatment option for influenza A (H1N1) pdm09 with umifenovir (Arbidol) 800 mg/day for 5 days (n=50); oseltamivir (Tamiflu) 150 mg/day for 5 days (n=50); umifenovir (Arbidol) 800 mg/day for 5 days in combination with Kagocel 72 mg/day for 2 days.
The infection efficiency of H1N1 pdm2009 influenza virus in the HUVEC-C cells was subsequently examined, and the expression of MMP-9 and proinflammatory cytokines, including tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-Alfa, interleukin (IL)-1Beta and IL-6, were determined in the virus-infected HUVEC-C cells, with or without oxLDL treatment.
H1N1 pdm2009 influenza virus efficiently infected the HUVEC-C cells and significantly promoted the expression of MMP-9, TNF-Alfa, IL-1Beta and IL-6, synergistically with the oxLDL treatment.
In the present study, using immunohistochemical staining analysis, the expression of LAIR-1 in human cervical cancer (HCC) and nontumor-adjacent tissue specimens was determined, and the results indicated that the expression of LAIR-1 in HCC tissue was higher compared with that in noncancerous tissue.
In this study, a tissue microarray containing 78 ovarian cancer cases was stained following a standard immunohistochemical protocol for LAIR-1 and the correlation of LAIR-1 expression with clinicopathologic features was assessed.
LAIR-1 was detected to express in tumor cells of ovarian cancer tissues (73.1%) and EOC cell lines COC1 and HO8910, not in normal ovarian tissues.
Previous studies have suggested debatable roles of Tax and HBZ gene expression in the pathogenesis of HTLV-1-associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis (HAM/TSP).
Human T cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) basic leucine zipper factor (HBZ), which is encoded by a minus strand mRNA, is thought to play important roles in the development of adult T-cell leukemia (ATL) and HTLV-1-associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis (HAM/TSP).
TIGIT was expressed on CD4+ T cells from HBZ-transgenic (HBZ-Tg) mice, and on ATL cells and HTLV-1 infected CD4+ T cells of HTLV-1-associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis (HAM/TSP) in vivo.
Combining a neprilysin inhibitor with an angiotensin II type 1 receptor blockers avoids the risk for angioedema.
ObcneAoBanN 40 namyNeHToB c aKc-CnA (KpNTepNN ASAS, 2009; Bo3pacT 38,5+/-12,1 roAa; 29 (72,5%) MyX4NH; AnNTenbHocTb aKc-CnA 6,67+/-5,8 roAa; NHAeKc BASDAI &gt;=4,0), KoTopble B cny4aNHoM nopRAKe pa3AeneHbl Ha rpynnbl: 20 bonbHblx npNHNManN myeneKoKcNb no 400 Mr/cyT B Te4eHNe 30 AHeN, 20 namyNeHToB - B Te4eHNe 7 AHeN myeneKoKcNb no 600 Mr/cyT, 3aTeM npoAonXNnN npNeM npenapaTa no 200 Mr/cyT Ao 1 Mec.
NamyNeHTbl HapRAy co cTaHAapTHoN cxeMoN ne4eHNR nony4anN MenaKceH 3 Mr/cyT B Te4eHNe 3 Mec.
NonoBNHa ETNx namyNeHToB bblnN onepNpoBaHbl cpa3y, a ApyrNe - nocne oapMaKonorN4ecKoro npeKoHANmyNoHNpoBaHNR aKToBerNHoM B Ao3e 1200 Mr/cyT B Te4eHNe 1,5 Mec.
NamyNeHTbl npNHNManN MarHepoT B cpeAHeM no 1878+/-823 Mr/cyT B Te4eHNe 4,2+/-29 Mec.
We investigated the tissue-specific features of the production of adipokines (leptin and adipsin) by adipose tissue in obese patients depending on the degree of obesity and the state of carbohydrate metabolism.
In patients with varying degrees of obesity with and without type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM 2), we determined the level of tissue-specific expression of LEP and CFD genes encoding leptin and adipsin, respectively.
The disturbance of reciprocal relationships between adipsin and leptin in obesity is associated with the development of insulin resistance.
While one of the most common forms of HBM is CLCN7-related autosomal dominant osteopetrosis type II (ADO II), there is no consensus on diagnostic thresholds.
We therefore wanted to assess whether CLCN7-osteopetrosis patients differ from benign HBM cases in terms of (1) bone mineral density, (2) bone structure, and (3) microarchitectural abnormalities.
Defects in the chloride channel 7 (CLCN7) gene lead to autosomal dominant osteopetrosis type II (ADOII, OPTA2 MIM 166600) and autosomal recessive osteopetrosis, autosomal recessive 4 (ARO, OPTB4 MIM 611490).
Dominant negative mutations in CLCN7, which encodes a homodimeric chloride channel needed for matrix acidification by osteoclasts, cause Albers-Schoenberg disease (also known as autosomal dominant osteopetrosis type 2).
Here we describe a mouse with a different osteopetrosis-causing mutation (Clcn7F318L).
Mutations of CLCN7 are observed in dominant form of osteopetrosis .The recessive form of ostreopetrosis, i.e., malignant infantile osteopetrosis (MIOP) presents early in life with extreme sclerosis of the skeleton and reduction of marrow space.
Dominant osteopetrosis is so far associated only with mutations in the CLCN7 gene and, although described as a benign form, it can be severely debilitating, although not at the same level as recessive forms, and can rarely result in reduced life expectancy.
Type II autosomal dominant osteopetrosis (ADO2), which is the most common form of osteopetrosis, is caused by heterozygous mutations in the chloride channel 7 (CLCN7) gene.
ADO2 is caused by missense mutations in the chloride channel 7 (CLCN7) gene characterized by osteosclerosis with multiple fractures.
CLC-7 mutations are known to cause autosomal dominant OPT type 2, also called Albers-Schonberg disease, which is characterized by osteosclerosis, predominantly of the spine, pelvis and skull base, resulting in bone fragility and fractures.
Thus, we identified a CLCN7 mutation in a family with autosomal dominant osteopetrosis, RTA, renal stones, epilepsy, and blindness.
In addition, with respect to the CLCN7 gene, we suggest that synonymous variants might also contribute to the large spectrum of severity typical of CLCN7-dependent osteopetrosis through more subtle, but not negligible, effects on protein availability and functionality.
Due to its predicted targeting of several genes involved in control of cellular growth, we examined the expression of miR-498 in colon cancer cell lines and a large cohort of patients with colorectal adenocarcinoma.
The colon cancer cell lines showed reduced expression of miR-498 compared to a normal colonic epithelial cell line.
In tissues, miR-498 expression was too low to be detected in all colorectal adenocarcinoma compared to non-neoplastic tissues.
This suggests that the down regulation of miR-498 in colorectal cancer tissues and the direct suppressive cellular effect noted in cancer cell lines implies that miR-498 has some direct or indirect role in the pathogenesis of colorectal adenocarcinomas.
Exosomal RNA NGS revealed that of 15 different classes of transcripts detected, 4 circulating exosomal sequences within the miRNA category were differentially expressed in RRMS patients versus HC: hsa-miR-122-5p, hsa-miR-196b-5p, hsa-miR-301a-3p, and hsa-miR-532-5p.
Significant NDI (sNDI) was defined as any Bayley Scales of Infant Development (BSID-III) score &lt;70, cerebral palsy &gt;= grade three, or severe vision or hearing impairment.
HIF-1Alfa co-localized with karyopherin Beta1 in the cytoplasm of AHCs and karyopherin Beta1 co-localized with nucleoporin 62 (Nup62) on the nuclear envelope.
From the presymptomatic stage of mSOD1 transgenic mice, karyopherin Beta1 immunoreactivity in AHC nuclei significantly decreased and morphological irregularities of the Nup62-immunostained nuclear envelope became more pronounced with disease progression.
These potential distribution maps for raptors were superimposed on avian influenza A risk maps of Japan, created from data on incidence of the virus in wild birds throughout Japan from October 2010 to March 2011.
Our results identify FKBP51 as an important regulator of PPARGamma in WAT and as a potential new target in the treatment of obesity and diabetes.
These findings indicate that maternal obesity parallels the deleterious effects of adult chronic stress exposure, and furthermore identifies GR/FKBP51 signaling as a novel candidate pathway regulated by maternal obesity.
Our combined investigations have uncovered FKBP51 as a key regulator of adipogenesis via the Akt-p38 pathway and as a potential target in the treatment of obesity and related disorders.
To assess if hypothalamic Fkbp51 promotes obesity, the gene was transferred to the hypothalamus via an adeno-associated virus vector.
To address this question, FKBP52(+/-) mice were placed on a high-fat (HF) diet known to induce obesity, hepatic steatosis, and insulin resistance.
To assess the efficacy of an original DAC-7 regimen: daunorubicine (DNR) 60 mg/m2/day, days 1-3; cytarabine (AraC) 200 mg/m2/day, days 1-7; cladribine (2-CdA) 5 mg/m2/day, days 1-5, 400 untreated adult acute myeloid leukemia patients (including 63 with preceding myelodysplastic syndrome), aged 45 (16-60) years were randomized to either DAC-7 (n=200) or DA-7 (without 2-CdA, n=200).
The probability of 3-year leukemia-free survival (LFS) for DAC-7 and DA-7 group equaled 43 and 34%, respectively (P=NS).
Severe combined immunodeficient mice were injected with one of two human T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia cell lines (Molt 3 and Molt 13) and were either left untreated or were treated with DA7, an immunotoxin specific for the T cell-associated antigen CD7.
In vivo, SPDP-DA7 showed a significant anti-tumor effect against CEM cells administered to scid/scid mice, but even more importantly was effective against primary T cell leukemias taken from patients and injected into scid/scid mice.
To study possible therapeutic approaches for disseminated leukemia we utilized an immunotoxin, DA7, constructed by chemically linking the mouse IgG2b anti-CD7(3A1E) monoclonal antibody which recognizes a pan-T-cell marker expressed on almost all T-cell leukemias to deglycosylated ricin A-chain, a catalytic plant toxin and inhibitor of protein synthesis.
We conclude that DA7 is an effective in vivo therapeutic agent against human MT-ALL in the SCID mouse system, suggesting potential usefulness for therapy of humans with poor prognosis T-cell leukemia.
We prospectively investigated in a private academically-affiliated infertility center 94 consecutive IVF cycles based on 6 criteria for oocyte quality: morphology, cytoplasm, perivitelline space (PVS), zona pellucida (ZP), polar body (PB) and oocyte size, each assigned a value of -1 (worst), 0 (average) or +1 (best), so establishing an average total oocyte score (TOS).
Though a larger study would possibly show a lower pregnancy rate in those women with unexplained infertility empirically treated with P vs the women with ovulation defects, the empirical use of P allows easy treatment without the side-effects of follicle-maturing drugs, e.g., hostile cervical mucus, vasomotor symptoms or ovarian cysts.
The presence of coarse granules in the PVS correlates with low implantation and pregnancy rates in IVF-ICSI cycles and might be regarded as a distinct entity, part of the yet poorly defined condition of "egg factor infertility."
MiR-29c directly suppressed the following Wnt upstream regulators: frequently rearranged in advanced T-cell lymphomas 2 (FRAT2), low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 6 (LRP6), Frizzled-4 (FZD4) and Frizzled-5 (FZD5).
Here, we demonstrate that MLL fusion oncogenes maintain leukemia-associated Rac activity by regulating Frat gene expression, specifically Frat2.
Modulation of FRAT2 leads to concomitant changes in Rac activity, and transformation of Frat knockout hematopoietic progenitor cells by MLL fusions results in leukemias displaying reduced Rac activation and increased sensitivity to chemotherapeutic drugs.
Of the 1,383 genes, 159 genes, including oncogenes ELK1, FRAT2, R-RAS, RHOB, and RHO6, were further selected as gene candidates that are silenced by DNA methylation in normal stomach mucosa but are activated by DNA demethylation in a subset of gastric cancers.
We have isolated the entire coding sequence of human FRAT2 (frequently rearranged in advanced T-cell lymphomas-2).
Results: Expressions of hsa-mir-1180, hsa-mir-149, hsa-mir-744 and hsa-mir-940 were all up regulated in high invasion capable cell lines (SNU423, SNU449) and vascular invasion patients with hepatocellular carcinoma (logFC&gt;1, P&lt;0.05).
Results from the Survival analysis showed that hsa-mir-1180 (HR=1.623, 95% CI: 1.114-2.365, P=0.012), hsa-mir-149 (HR=2.400, 95% CI: 1.639-3.514) and hsa-mir-940 (HR=1.704, 95%CI: 1.188-2.443, P=0.004) were independent risk factors on the prognosis of patients with hepatocellular carcinoma (P&lt;0.05).
Conclusion: With TCGA and GEO data mining, we found that hsa-mir-1180, hsa-mir-149, hsa-mir-744 and hsa-mir-940 were all highly related to the prognosis of hepatocellular carcinoma, that enabled it to be used to further study the biomarkers related to the prognosis of hepatocellular carcinoma.
Recently, several studies have investigated the association between polymorphisms in miR-146a rs2910164, miR-196a2 rs11614913, miR-499 rs3746444, miR-149 rs229283, miR-34b/c rs4938723, and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), which showed inconclusive results.
Numerous studies have explored the association between MIR-149 gene rs2292832 polymorphism and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) risk, but the results remains inconsistent.
When all the eligible studies were pooled into this meta-analysis, a significant association between MIR-149 gene rs2292832 polymorphism and hepatocellular carcinoma risk was found, while no association was found between this gene polymorphism and overall cancer risk.
We used"hepatocellular carcinoma/HCC","miRNA-149/miR-149/microRNA-149", and"miRNA-499/miR-499/microRNA-499"as key words to search papers in databases including China National Knowledge Internet (CNKI), Chinese BioMedical Literature (CBM), Vip Citation Databases (VIP), Wanfang, PubMed and Web of Science databases, and collected the case-control studies on the association of rs2292832 or rs3746444 and the susceptibility to hepatocellular carcinoma from updated to May 31st 2015.
Numerous studies have explored the association between miR-149 gene rs2292832 polymorphism and hepatocellular carcinoma risk, but the results remains inconsistent.
Odds ratios (OR) with 95% confidence intervals (CI), calculated by STATA software, were used to determine whether miR-149 gene rs2292832 polymorphism contributes to the risk of Hepatocellular carcinoma.
When all the eligible studies were pooled into this meta-analysis, a significant association between miR-149 gene rs2292832 polymorphism and hepatocellular carcinoma risk was found.
Our meta-analysis supports that the miR-149 gene rs2292832 polymorphism contributed to the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma from currently available evidence.
However, a study with a larger sample size is needed to further evaluate gene-environment interaction on MiR-149 gene rs2292832 polymorphism and hepatocellular carcinoma risk.
We conducted a case-control study to evaluate the association of miR-146a rs2910164 (C&gt;G), miR-149 rs2292832 (T&gt;C), miR-196a2 rs11614913 (T&gt;C) and miR-499 rs3746444 (T&gt;C) polymorphisms with the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma.
DM prevalence was 25.3% (95% CI 22.6-28.5) and that of pre-diabetes 24.5% (95% CI 20.4-27.6).
This study aimed to use the National Cancer Institute (NCI) markers BAT25, BAT26, D2S123, D5S346 and D17S250 to evaluate MSI in patients with ovarian serous cystadenocarcinoma, compared with ovarian serous cystadenoma and normal ovaries.
This study was undertaken to determine gemcitabine's efficacy against bladder cancer cell lines of different origins (HTB2, a papilloma; HTB3, a squamous cell carcinoma; and HTB4, a transitional cell carcinoma).
Four cases showed silent p53 mutations upon direct sequencing and 4 revealed loss of heterozygosity at the loci evaluated, including 1 at D5S346 [adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene], 1 at D17S250 (p53 gene), and 2 at MYCL (chromosome 1p34).
Frequent allelic losses were identified at D17S802 (41%), D7S518 (40%), D18S53 (38%), D10S249 (32%), D2S391 (29%), D16S419 (27%), D15S1005 and D15S120 (24%), D9S274 and D11S1318 (23%), D14S65 (20%), D14S274 and D17S953 (19%), D19S424 (18%), D5S346 and D1S397 (15%), and D6S468 (13%) in multiple FAP adenomas.
In addition, allele-specific LOH at D5S346, D15S1005, and D15S120 was observed in multiple FAP adenomas (P &lt; 0.01) and at D2S206 and D16S423 in multiple CRC (P &lt; 0.05).
Our purpose was to investigate the possible association of ERAP1 and ERAP2 gene SNPs with psoriatic arthritis susceptibility in Romanian population.
Psoriatic arthritis patients (N = 98) and random healthy controls (N = 139) were genotyped for ERAP1/2 genes SNPs rs30187, rs27044, rs2910686, and rs2248374 by TaqMan Allelic Discrimination Assays.
These associations include ERAP1, CCR1-CCR3, STAT4, KLRC4, GIMAP4, and TNFAIP3 in Behcet's disease; BLK and CD40 in Kawasaki disease; SERPINA1 and SEMA6A in antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody associated vasculitides; IL12B and FCGR2A/ FCGR2A in Takayasu arteritis; and CECR1 in a newly defined vascular inflammatory syndrome associated with adenosine deaminase (ADA2) deficiency.
The quarter-embryos were sexed by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using BRY.1, Bov97M and ZFX/ZFY loci, and then genotyped for k-casein, bovine leukocyte adhesion deficiency (BLAD) and microsatellite D9S1.
At day 7 EPS, P wave and induced atrial fibrillation (AF) durations were significantly longer in the mutant groups when compared to wtCx40 controls (p&lt;0.05).
In multivariate analysis, preoperative digoxin exposure (odds ratio [OR] 2.4, 95% confidence interval [CI] 1.3-4.4), aortic cross-clamp time (OR 1.08, 95% CI 1.04-1.11), ventricular septal defect closure (OR 2.2, 95% CI 1.2-4.1), and a common polymorphism in the gene encoding connexin-40 (GJA5 rs10465885 TT genotype; OR 2.1, 95% CI 1.2-3.8) were independently associated with postoperative CHB.
In fact intracellular pathways related to immunological alterations, endothelial dysfunction and insulin resistance in preeclampsia converge on these molecules.
There was no clear evidence of a difference between those who had been treated with insulin and those who had been treated with an oral anti-diabetic pharmacological therapy for the risk of pre-eclampsia (RR 1.14, 95% CI 0.86 to 1.52; 10 studies, 2060 women; moderate-quality evidence); the risk of birth by caesarean section (RR 1.03, 95% CI 0.93 to 1.14; 17 studies, 1988 women; moderate-quality evidence); or the risk of developing type 2 diabetes (metformin only) (RR 1.39, 95% CI 0.80 to 2.44; two studies, 754 women; moderate-quality evidence).
We assessed the quality of the evidence for selected important outcomes using GRADE; the evidence was low- or very low-quality, due to downgrading because of design limitations (risk of bias) and imprecise effect estimates (for many outcomes only one or two RCTs contributed data).For our primary outcomes there was no clear difference between metformin and insulin groups for pre-eclampsia (risk ratio (RR) 0.63, 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.33 to 1.20; RCTs = 2; participants = 227; very low-quality evidence) although in one RCT women receiving metformin were less likely to have pregnancy-induced hypertension (RR 0.58, 95% CI 0.37 to 0.91; RCTs = 1; participants = 206; low-quality evidence).
Low to very low-quality evidence suggests possible reductions in pregnancy-induced hypertension, caesarean section birth and neonatal hypoglycaemia with metformin compared with insulin for women with type 2 diabetes diagnosed before or during their pregnancy, and no clear differences in pre-eclampsia, induction of labour and babies that are large-for-gestational age.
To perform meta-analyses of studies evaluating the risk of pre-eclampsia in high-risk insulin-resistant women taking metformin prior to, or during, pregnancy.
A meta-analysis of eight randomized controlled trials comparing metformin (n=838) with insulin (n=836), however, showed a reduced risk of pre-eclampsia with metformin (risk ratio 0.68, 95% CI 0.48-0.95; P = 0.02; I2 =0%).
In studies randomizing pregnant women to glucose-lowering therapy, metformin was associated with lower gestational weight gain and a lower risk of pre-eclampsia compared with insulin.
Ranking results showed that glyburide might be the optimum treatment regarding average glucose control, and metformin is the fastest in glucose control for GDM patients; glyburide have the highest incidence of macrosomia, preeclampsia, hyperbilirubinemia, neonatal hypoglycemia, shortest gestational age at delivery, and lowest mean birth weight; metformin (plus insulin when required) have the lowest incidence of macrosomia, PIH, LGA, RDS, low gestational age at delivery, and low birth weight.
The incidence of pre-eclampsia, a multisystem disorder of pregnancy, is fourfold higher in type 1 diabetic than non-diabetic women; it is also increased in women with features of the metabolic syndrome and insulin resistance.
In a prospective study of pregnant women with type 1 diabetes, we measured plasma levels of adipokines known to be associated with insulin resistance: leptin, fatty acid binding protein 4 (FABP4), adiponectin (total and high molecular weight [HMW]; also known as high molecular mass), retinol binding protein 4 (RBP4) and resistin and evaluated associations with the subsequent development of pre-eclampsia.
By logistic regression analyses after covariate adjustment (HbA1c, insulin kg-1 day-1 and gestational age), the best predictive models for pre-eclampsia were as follows: Visit 1, doubling of leptin, OR 9.0 (p &lt; 0.01); Visit 2, doubling of the leptin:total adiponectin ratio, OR 3.7 (p &lt; 0.05); and Visit 3, doubling of FABP4 concentration, OR 25.1 (p &lt; 0.01).
As early as the first trimester in type 1 diabetic women, adipokine profiles that suggest insulin resistance are associated with subsequent pre-eclampsia, possibly reflecting maternal characteristics that precede pregnancy.
Insulin resistance may predispose women with type 1 diabetes to pre-eclampsia.
To evaluate the anterior segment biometric features and corneal endothelial changes in eyes with pseudoexfoliation (PEX) syndrome and senile cataract.
To investigate the prevalence of pseudoexfoliation syndrome (PEX) among Turkish patients with senile cataract.
To compare the intraoperative and immediate postoperative behavior and complications in eyes with pseudoexfoliation (PEX) syndrome with eyes having senile cataract without PEX during cataract surgery using phacoemulsification (PKE).
In this prospective study, 68 eyes of 68 patients were divided into two groups: Group 1 (test) comprised 34 eyes with immature senile cataract with PEX and Group 2 (control) included 34 eyes with immature senile cataract without PEX and any coexisting ocular pathology.
The most common cataract type in the PEX patients was mature cataract observed in 40.7% of patients.
Evaluation of central corneal thickness (CCT) and endothelial cell density (ECD) in patients with senile cataract and coexisting pseudoexfoliation (PEX) syndrome with glaucoma (PEXG) and without glaucoma using specular microscopy.
The characteristics of the corneal endothelium in patients with/without pseudoexfoliation syndrome (PEX) with senile cataract in Paraguay are unknown.
We evaluated the preventive role of the capsular tension ring (CTR) in zonular and capsular complications in the phacoemulsification surgery of cataracts with pseudoexfoliation (PEX) in two groups of eyes with senile cataract associated with PEX, with (Group A) or without (Group B) CTR implantation.
The present study used a rat model with bile duct ligation to examine the effect of cholestasis, to the localization of occludin in brain capillary endothelium by means of electronic microscopy.
The aim of this study was to assess the diagnostic value of hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) as a new predictor of severity in patients with acute pancreatitis (AP) at early phase of disease.
Serum HGF correlates with several inflammatory markers and clinical scores (Glasgow, Imrie) in patients with AP and may be considered a new promising tool in assessing the severity of acute pancreatitis.
Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) overexpression is observed in experimental and clinical acute pancreatitis.
Administration of HGF without induction of acute pancreatitis increased pancreatic prostaglandin E(2) generation and plasma interleukin-10, and this effect was abolished by the cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor, rofecoxib.
We conclude that: (1) HGF induces cyclooxygenase-2 but not cyclooxygenase-1 expression; (2) inhibition of cyclooxygenase-2 in HGF-treated rats decreases the release of anti-inflammatory interleukin-10, increases the production of pro-inflammatory interleukin-1 beta and reduces pancreatic blood flow; (3) cyclooxygenase-2 activity is necessary for the protective effect of HGF in acute pancreatitis.
Previous studies have shown the protective effect of epidermal growth factor (EGF), Hepatocyte Growth Factor (HGF) and Fibroblast Growth Factor (FGF) in the course of experimental acute pancreatitis.
Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) overexpression was reported in experimental and clinical acute pancreatitis.
Acute pancreatitis was induced by s.c. infusion of caerulein (10 microg/kg/h) for 5 h. HGF was administrated twice (30 min before caerulein or saline infusion and 3 h later) at the doses: 0.4, 2, 10 or 50 microg/kg s.c.
We previously reported that serum hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) levels are elevated in patients with acute pancreatitis and that pancreatitis-associated ascitic fluid (PAAF) contains cytotoxic factor(s) inducing apoptosis on Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells.
In this study, plasma HGF levels and HGF tissue distribution were investigated in rats with experimental acute pancreatitis, and the effects of HGF on the cytotoxic activity and apoptosis-inducing activity of PAAF also were examined.
These results suggest that HGF is produced in injured organs and may function as an organotrophic and antiapoptotic factor against the organ injuries in acute pancreatitis.
Among the various neurological features, aseptic meningitis is the most common myeloradiculopathy, myelopathy, cerebellar dysfunction, transverse myelitis, Guillain-Barre syndrome, optic neuritis, peripheral neuropathy hare also described.
To study was to study the expression of CD40/CD40L in colon cancer and investigate the effects of CD40/CD40L overexpression on the proliferation and apoptosis of SW48 colon cancer cell line.
A CD40L gene-containing plasmid was transfected into SW48 colon cancer cells using lipofectamine 2000.
In conclusion, CD40 protein expression was significantly higher in colon cancer tissue compared with normal tissue, and the apoptosis of SW48 colon cancer cells can be induced by CD40L gene transfection.
Upon CD40 ligand (CD40L) binding, CD40/CD40L signaling inhibited colon cancer proliferation, induced apoptosis, stalled cells at G0/G1, and influenced cell adhesion and metastasis.
Real-time PCR and western blotting analysis showed that AHRR expression in colon cancer cells was up-regulated by CD40L binding.
It has been observed previously that MG patients with clinically suspected myocarditis had anti-Kv1.4 antibodies.
Cardiac findings including electrocardiography (ECG) and clinical features of clinically suspected myocarditis in MG patients with anti-Kv1.4 antibodies were investigated.
Clinically suspected myocarditis was found in eight MG patients with anti-Kv1.4 antibodies but in none of the MG patients without anti-Kv1.4 antibodies.
This contrasts to the Japanese anti-Kv1.4 antibody-positive patients who suffered from severe MG with bulbar symptoms, myasthenic crisis, thymoma, myocarditis and prolonged QT time on electrocardiography, despite equal anti-Kv1.4 antibody occurrence in both populations.
Anti-Kv1.4 antibody is a useful marker for the potential development of lethal autoimmune myocarditis and response to calcineurin inhibitors.
Autoimmune myocarditis may develop in MG patients who have the anti-Kv1.4 antibody.
Clinical associations were found between anti-Kv1.4 and bulbar involvement, myasthenic crisis, thymoma, and concomitant myocarditis and/or myositis; between antititin and older-onset MG; between anti-acetylcholine receptor alone and younger-onset MG; and between seronegativity and ocular MG.
Clinical features associated with anti-Kv1.4 antibody included bulbar involvement, myasthenic crisis, thymoma, myocarditis, and QT prolongation on electrocardiogram.
During the active myocarditis phase, the effective refractory period (ERP), the duration of the monophasic action potential (MAPD) was extracted from the left ventricular free wall, and the mRNA levels of Kv1.4, 4.2, 4.3 and L type Ca2+ channel were determined by RNase protection assays.
Of the three tumours described, one tumour showed a mixture of a proliferating pilar tumour and syringocystadenoma papilliferum, the second lesion was composed of a proliferating pilar tumour and tubulopapillary hidradenoma and the third tumour exhibited a syringocystadenoma papilliferum and tubulopapillary hidradenoma in combination.
We studied the baseline expression level of 25 interferon-regulated genes (MxA, GPR3, IL17RC, ISG15, TRAIL, OASL, IFIT1, IFIT2, RSAD2, OAS3, IFI44L, TRIM22, IL10, CXCL10, STAT1, OAS1, OAS2, IFNAR1, IFNAR2, IFNBeta, ISG20, IFI6, PKR, IRF7, USP18), recurrently proposed in the literature as predictive biomarkers of interferon-beta treatment response, in whole blood of 10 "responders" and 10 "non-responders" multiple sclerosis relapsing-remitting patients, retrospectively selected on the basis of stringent clinical criteria after a five years follow-up.
In addition to having SI, Dpcd/Poll(-/-) mice (for: deleted in a mouse model of primary ciliary dyskinesia) and Nme7(-/-) mice (for: nonmetastatic cells 7) had lesions consistent with deficient ciliary motility: Hydrocephalus, sinusitis, and male infertility developed in Dpcd/Poll(-/-) mice, whereas hydrocephalus and excessive nasal exudates were seen in Nme7(-/-) mice.
As a proof of concept, we designed a multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification assay targeted to screen the six genes that are most frequently mutated in Diamond-Blackfan anemia patients: RPS17, RPS19, RPS26, RPL5, RPL11, and RPL35A.
Mutations in a number of genes encoding transcription factors - such as HESX1, SOX2, SOX3, LHX3, LHX4, PROP1, POU1F1, PITX, GLI3, GLI2, OTX2, ARNT2, IGSF1, FGF8, FGFR1, PROKR2, PROK2, CHD7, WDR11, NFKB2, PAX6, TCF7L1, IFT72, GPR161 and CDON - have been associated with pituitary dysfunction and abnormal pituitary gland development; the correlation of genetic mutations to endocrine and MRI phenotypes has improved our knowledge of pituitary development and management of patients with hypopituitarism, both in terms of possible genetic counseling, and of early diagnosis of evolving anterior pituitary hormone deficiencies.
Musashi-1 (Msi-1), an RNA-binding protein associated with neural progenitor cells, has been shown by others to increase the accumulation of tau isoforms in intracellular inclusions in frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17.
The HOXA11-AS1 lncRNA and HOXA9, HOXA10, HOXA11, and HOXA13 mRNA were expressed at significantly lower levels in the EU than in the EC, that is, in women with peritoneal endometriosis ( P &lt; .05).
The expression levels of HOXA10 and HOXA11 in the EU were significantly lower in women with peritoneal endometriosis compared to the control group participants ( P &lt; .05), whereas the levels of lncRNA ( HOXA11-AS1), HOXA9, and HOXA13 did not differ significantly between the 2 patient groups ( P &gt; .05).
In conclusion, the study findings suggest that HOXA11-AS1 lncRNA may play a role in the development of peritoneal endometriosis, but HOXA11-AS1 may not influence endometrial receptivity in endometriosis-associated infertility.
Genome-wide conjunctional analysis identified 17 novel loci at false discovery rate less than 0.05 with overlap between PD and autoimmune diseases, including known PD loci adjacent to GAK, HLA-DRB5, LRRK2, and MAPT for rheumatoid arthritis, ulcerative colitis and Crohn disease.
The genetic association of HLA-DRB1 with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is well documented, but association with other HLA-DR beta genes (HLA-DRB3, HLA-DRB4 and HLA-DRB5) has not been thoroughly studied, despite their similar functions and chromosomal positions.
Using intravital two-photon microscopy in the mouse model of multiple sclerosis, we detected antigen recognition motility of the OT-1 CD8(+) T cells within the CNS leading to a selective enrichment in inflammatory lesions.
In the histological analysis, acute tubular necrosis was only marginally ameliorated following EPO administration.
The results showed that BMSCs transplantation or EPO injection alone decreased the BUN and Scr levels and the acute tubular necrosis (ATN) scoring in varied degrees.
In animals, recombinant erythropoietin (RhuEPO) leads to faster recovery after acute tubular necrosis.
Group 2: 4 patients with acute tubular necrosis had no reticulocytes peak before d29 despite one or several erythropoietin peaks.
Serum erythropoietin (EPO) concentrations were markedly depressed relative to the degree of anaemia in 10 patients with acute tubular necrosis, and remained low long after restoration of excretory renal function as estimated by glomerular filtration rate.
It is suggested that the predominantly are generatory anaemia found in prolonged cases of acute tubular necrosis, and the slow restoration of red cell mass during recovery, are due to the deficient synthesis of EPO.
HDAC inhibitor BA could inhibit LPS-induced pulmonary fibrosis and Thy-1 gene silencing through inhibiting activation of HDAC and deacetylation of histone H4.
We found that CS-induced distinct posttranslational histone modification patterns in histone H3 and histone H4 in lung cells, which may be considered as usable biomarkers for CS-induced chronic lung diseases.
These identified histone marks (histone H3 and histone H4) may play an important role in the epigenetic state during the pathogenesis of smoking-induced chronic lung diseases, such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and lung cancer.
Since VDR and CD86 expression are decreased in the setting of melanoma and non-melanoma skin cancers, our findings suggest a potential role of vitamin D-deficiency in the progression of skin malignancies.
In the search for a more consistent apocrine marker, immunoreactivity for MAb B72.3 was examined in apocrine carcinomas at different stages and compared with GCDFP-15.
47 of 51 apocrine carcinomas (92%) and 9 of 62 ordinary carcinomas (15%) were MAb B72.3 positive, while 39 of 51 apocrine carcinomas (76%) and 13 of 62 ordinary carcinomas (21%) were GCDFP-15 positive.
The combined usage of MAb B72.3 with GCDFP-15 was useful to confirm the diagnosis of apocrine carcinoma, especially for advanced tumors, with only two cases being negative for both MAb B72.3 and GCDFP-15.
Double-deficient mice showed significantly reduced UV-induced skin tumor development, whereas CD86(-/-) mice produced skin cancer earlier compared with CD80(-/-) and control mice.
We determined the concentration of peripheral blood lymphocytes, which expressed the CD80/CD86 or CD28/CTLA-4 molecules, in 38 patients with cutaneous melanoma and 27 controls.
In the Neuro2a-ATD2 cells, the IC50 of acrolein increased from 4.2 to 6.8myM, and the levels of FosB and C/EBPBeta - transcription factors involved in the transcription of AcPAO and SMO genes - were reduced.
It was also found that transfection of siRNA for C/EBPBeta decreased SMO promoter activity in Neuro2a cells but not in ATD2 cells confirming that a decrease in C/EBPBeta is involved in the reduced SMO activity in Neuro2a-ATD2 cells.
When glucose records from self-blood glucose monitoring (SBGM) do not reflect estimated average glucose from HgBA1, or when patients' clinical symptoms are not explained by their SBGM records, clinical management of diabetes becomes a challenge.
CDE = Certified Diabetes Educator; CGM = Continuous glucose monitoring; HgBA1 = Glycosylated hemoglobin; MAD = Mean absolute difference; SBGM = Self-blood glucose monitoring; T1DM = Type 1 diabetes; T2DM = Type 2 diabetes.
This study was designed to assess the reliability of blood glucose level estimation in gingival crevicular blood(GCB) for screening diabetes mellitus.
Cases of gCB are defined as those with CB, diabetes mellitus and high signal intensities (HSIs) in the putamen on T1 weighted imaging (T1WI).
screen for diabetes control, this study compared glycosylated hemoglobin (HbAlc) levels found in GCB and serum.
This study was designed to explore the expression and role of IQGAP3 in pancreatic cancer, a highly lethal disease.
IQGAP3 mRNA expression was significantly increased in pancreatic cancer tissues, compared with non-cancerous tissues.
Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) on The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) dataset showed that cell apoptosis, metastasis and Cdc42 pathways were strongly associated with IQGAP3 expression in pancreatic cancer patients.
Knocking down of IQGAP3 in two pancreatic cancer cell lines with high level of IQGAP3 (BXPC-3 and SW1990) significantly inhibited cell proliferation, migration and invasion, and induced cell apoptosis.
In conclusion, IQGAP3 may act as an oncogene in pancreatic cancer through regulating Cdc42 expression.
The combination of ATRA and ATO targeting PML-RARA fusions has proven to be effective in acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL).
In this work, a simple and enzyme-free surface plasmon resonance (SPR) biosensing strategy has been developed for highly sensitive detection of two major PML/RARAlfa (promyelocytic leukemia, retinoic acid receptor alpha) subtypes based on the heterogeneous fusion gene-triggered nonlinear hybridization chain reaction (HCR).
Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is a rare form of AML, which generally presents with a t(15;17) translocation causing expression of the fusion protein PML-RARA.
The authors' analysis led to the discovery of a novel RARA superenhancer found in a subset of patients with AML, rendering these leukemia cells highly sensitive to SY-1425, a highly potent RARA agonist able to induce myeloid differentiation in these high-expressing RARA AML subtypes.
Immunohistochemistry for TLR2, 4 and 5 was performed with anti-TLR2-TLR4-TLR5 antibodies in 117 histological samples of normal gastric mucosa (n = 22), HP+ gastritis (n = 20), intestinal metaplasia (n = 33), dysplasia (mucosectomy specimens, n = 20) and intestinal type adenocarcinoma (surgery specimens,n = 22); quantification of expression was performed independently by two pathologists taking into account the percentage of positive epithelial cells and the degree of expression (zero to three score).
For the first time TLR4, TLR5 and TLR9 have been microanatomically localized in patients with noninflamed gastric mucosa and Helicobacter pylori gastritis by immunohistochemistry.
TLR4, TLR5 and TLR9 were expressed by gastric epithelium in antrum and corpus of all patients with H. pylori gastritis (n = 14) and with noninflamed gastric mucosa (n = 5).
However, in H. pylori gastritis TLR5 and TLR9 expression on the gastric epithelium changed to an exclusive basolateral localization without detectable expression at the apical pole.
The majority of NF1-associated spine neurofibromas are asymptomatic; however, a minority of patients will experience neurologic symptoms that can range from mild paresthesia, radiculopathy, myelopathy, and focal weakness to quadriplegia in extreme cases.
Our patient, unlike those in other reports, illustrates multiple aetiologies of hip dislocation in NF1 including local factors, lumbar radiculopathy and polyneuropathy, reinforcing the importance of a multidisciplinary approach in the management of such cases.
Thus, ruptured extracranial vertebral artery aneurysm should be considered in the differential diagnosis of patients with NF1 with sudden-onset radiculopathy, even in the absence of typical symptoms.
The coexistence of polyneuropathy which has the definite clinical and electromyographical findings consistent with Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) syndrome and neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) has infrequently been reported.
An 18-year-old woman with previously diagnosed NF1 presented with a C6 radiculopathy.
Neuropathies are typically observed in young men with subcutaneous neurofibromas (NF1) or cutaneous schwannomas (NF2) and are characterized by a chronic slowly worsening sensorimotor polyneuropathy of the lower limbs.
We conducted genome-wide association studies (GWAS) to identify susceptibility loci for glomerular filtration rate, estimated by serum creatinine (eGFRcrea) and cystatin C (eGFRcys), and CKD (eGFRcrea &lt; 60 ml/min/1.73 m(2)) in European-ancestry participants of four population-based cohorts (ARIC, CHS, FHS, RS; n = 19,877; 2,388 CKD cases), and tested for replication in 21,466 participants (1,932 CKD cases).
Although several genetic associations have been identified between CCR6 polymorphisms and immune system disorders (e.g., rheumatoid arthritis and Crohn's disease), the pharmacological effects of naturally occurring missense mutations in this receptor have yet to be characterized.
A genome-wide association study in Japan identified the C-C chemokine receptor type 6 gene (CCR6) as associated with rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
This evidence supports loci for the genes encoding for both catalase and the aniridia-Wilms' tumor association within the bands p13-p14 of the short arm of chromosome 11; the normal activity of LDH-A supports a locus outside this region.
Observed familial clustering of hepatic iron overload with A1ATD suggests a genetic cause, but genotypes known to be associated with hemochromatosis were absent.
Our aim was to estimate the frequency of hemochromatosis gene (HFE) mutant alleles (C282Y and H63D) and alpha-1 antitrypsin S/Z variants among Egyptian HCV cirrhotic patients and in hepatocellular carcinoma patients and to evaluate their effects on disease progression.
In this review, we focus our description of this phenomenon on inherited disorders affecting the liver, with a particular emphasis on Wilson disease (WD), genetic hemochromatosis, and Alfa-1 anti-trypsin disease (A1-AT).
Other much less frequent (yet not rare) causes of persistent non-virus non-alcohol related elevations in aminotransferase levels are celiac disease and hemochromatosis, whereas autoimmune hepatitis, primary biliary cirrhosis, primary sclerosing cholangitis, and alpha-1-anti-trypsin deficit are rare.
This retrospective study includes patients with vulvar squamous cell carcinoma who underwent inguinofemoral lymphadenectomy (IFL) between 1998 and 2011.
Our aim was to compare the risk of groin recurrence and morbidity in patients with lymph node positive VSCC after standard full inguinofemoral lymphadenectomy (IFL) versus less radical debulking of clinically involved lymph nodes or removal of sentinel nodes only followed by radiotherapy.
The objective of the study is to determine the risk factors for groin recurrence (GR) in patients with primary vulvar squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) after inguinofemoral lymphadenectomy (IFL) without lymph node metastases and/or adjuvant chemoradiotherapy.
All cytokines, with the exception of IFN alpha, showed inhibitory effects on DNA synthesis by vulvar carcinoma cells.
Using genetic murine models, we found that proximal tubule-specific deletion of Drp1 prevented the renal ischemia-reperfusion-induced kidney injury, inflammation, and programmed cell death observed in wild-type mice and promoted epithelial recovery, which associated with activation of the renoprotective Beta-hydroxybutyrate signaling pathway.
Lastly, proximal tubule deletion of DRP1 after ischemia-reperfusion injury attenuated progressive kidney injury and fibrosis.
Neurodegenerative diseases are associated with mitochondrial dysfunction, and the downregulation of DLP-1 has been previously identified in a stroke animal model.
Here, we investigated the changes in DLP-1 protein expression in an animal model of focal cerebral ischemia with induced hyperglycemia.
To investigate the protective effect of dynamin-related protein 1 (Drp1) in rats with myocardial ischemia/reperfusion injury (IRI).
Furthermore, trimetazidine improved mitochondrial biosynthesis and fission/fusion, as demonstrated by the promotion of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARGamma) co-activator 1Alfa (PGC-1Alfa), mitofusins 1 (Mfn1), dynamin-related protein 1 (Drp1), and optic atrophy 1 (Opa1) expressions in rats with acute myocardial ischemia.
For example, TRIM39/RPP21 read through transcript is a known mediator of the interferon response, a central pathway involved in the pathogenesis of CLE and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).
Taken together, this genomewide analysis of disease association of CLE identified candidate genes and genomic regions that may contribute to pathogenic mechanisms in CLE via dysregulated antigen presentation (HLA-DQA1), apoptosis regulation, RNA processing and interferon response (MICA, MICB, MSH5, TRIM39 and RPP21).
Non-O BG type predicted invasive carcinoma independently from high serum CA19-9 and male gender.
The results of the study suggest that in pancreatic IPMN, non-O BG type predicted invasive carcinoma, whereas for intratumor BG-antigen expression no specific patterns were detected with regard to the progression of glandular epithelial dysplasia or invasion.
Analysis of the UOK-109 renal carcinoma cell line confirmed the break-apart TFE3 probe set can distinguish the subtle TFE3/NONO fusion-associated inversion of chromosome X.
Treatment with HA-1A also had a significant positive effect on resolution of the major complications of sepsis (shock, disseminated intravascular coagulation, acute renal failure, acute hepatic failure, or adult respiratory distress syndrome) in patients with documented gram-negative bacteremia.
Interestingly, miR-124 was down-regulated in the spinal cord in cancer pain conditions, leading to an up-regulation of Synpo.
Furthermore, intrathecal injections of miR-124 mimics in cancerous mice normalized Synpo expression and completely alleviated cancer pain in the early phase of the cancer.
Podocyte loss was measured by Wilms' Tumor 1-positive podocyte nuclear counting and density, glomerular epithelial protein 1 or synaptopodin-positive podocyte tuft area and urinary podocyte mRNA excretion rate.
Using an immunohistochemical technique, we examined the natural course of nephrin, Wilms' tumor-1 (WT1) and synaptopodin at 16.5 days of embryonic age (E16.5d) and E19.5d, 7 days of post-neonatal age (P7d) and P42d during renal development of mice.
Expression of Wilms' tumor-1 (WT1) and synaptopodin were detected by immunofluorescence and western blotting.
We generated a rabbit polyclonal antibody against the conjugated peptide from human INF2 and studied the glomerular expression of INF2 and synaptopodin using normal human adult kidney tissues and tissues from children with glomerular diseases such as minimal change disease (MCD), FSGS, IgA nephropathy (IgAN), non-IgA mesangial proliferative glomerulonephritis (non-IgAN), and Henoch-Schoenlein purpura nephritis (HSPN).
Mouse podocyte cells (MPC5) were treated with TAC and/or TGF-Beta1 for 48 h. The mRNA levels and protein expression of synaptopodin and Wilms' tumor 1 (WT1) were determined by real-time PCR, Western blotting and/or immunofluorescence, respectively.
In contrast, only a small percentage of tumor cells (~10%) show p-ERK1/2 expression in Burkitt lymphoma and double hit lymphoma.
Besides, we screened for all the known genes related to axonal autosomal recessive Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT2A2/HMSN2A2/MFN2, CMT2B1/LMNA, CMT2B2/MED25, CMT2B5/NEFL, ARCMT2F/dHMN2B/HSPB1, CMT2K/GDAP1, CMT2P/LRSAM1, CMT2R/TRIM2, CMT2S/IGHMBP2, CMT2T/HSJ1, CMTRID/COX6A1, ARAN-NM/HINT and GAN/GAN), for the genes related to autosomal recessive hereditary spastic paraplegia with thin corpus callosum and axonal peripheral neuropathy (SPG7/PGN, SPG15/ZFYVE26, SPG21/ACP33, SPG35/FA2H, SPG46/GBA2, SPG55/C12orf65 and SPG56/CYP2U1), as well as for the causative gene of peripheral neuropathy with or without agenesis of the corpus callosum (SLC12A6).
Genetic testing demonstrated heterozygous mutation Pro209Leu (c.626C &gt; T) in exon 3 of BAG3 gene causing severe myopathy and neuropathy, often associated with restrictive cardiomyopathy.
The women with amenorrhea at Treatment Month 3 had significantly better scores on all UFS-QoL subscales and HRQL Total than women with menstrual bleeding, indicating acceptable discriminant validity.
UFS features incomplete urinary bladder emptying and vesicoureteric reflux, with a high risk of recurrent urosepsis and end-stage renal disease.
Non-neurogenic neurogenic bladder (NNNB) has a bladder identical to UFS without typical facial features.
HPSE2 mutations were absent in 23 non-neurogenic neurogenic bladder probands and, of 439 families with nonsyndromic vesicoureteric reflux, only one carried a putative pathogenic HPSE2 variant.
Urofacial syndrome (UFS) (or Ochoa syndrome) is an autosomal-recessive disease characterized by congenital urinary bladder dysfunction, associated with a significant risk of kidney failure, and an abnormal facial expression upon smiling, laughing, and crying.
Atopy and the Th2 profile therefore seem to be associated with chronic dermatophytosis.
In addition, several new PheWAS findings were identified including a cluster of association near the NDFIP1 gene for mental retardation (best SNP rs10057309, p = 4.33 x 10(-7), OR = 1.70, 95%CI = 1.38 - 2.09); association near PLCL1 gene for developmental delays and speech disorder [best SNP rs1595825, p = 1.13 x 10(-8), OR = 0.65(0.57 - 0.76)]; a cluster of associations in the IL5-IL13 region with Eosinophilic Esophagitis (EoE) [best at rs12653750, p = 3.03 x 10(-9), OR = 1.73 95%CI = (1.44 - 2.07)], previously implicated in asthma, allergy, and eosinophilia; and association of variants in GCKR and JAZF1 with allergic rhinitis in our pediatric cohorts [best SNP rs780093, p = 2.18 x 10(-5), OR = 1.39, 95%CI = (1.19 - 1.61)], previously demonstrated in metabolic disease and diabetes in adults.
Twenty-seven SNPs in VHL, HGF, IL18, PRKACB, ABCB1, CYP2C8, ERCC2, and ERCC1 previously associated with ovarian cancer outcome were genotyped in 10,084 invasive cases from 28 studies from the Ovarian Cancer Association Consortium with over 37,000-observed person-years and 4,478 deaths.
Using the most comprehensive approach to selecting polymorphisms to date, we sought to examine whether time to recurrence in ovarian cancer was associated with common inherited variation in eight genes involved in drug metabolism, multi-drug resistance, or DNA repair, namely ABCB1, CYP2C8, CYP3A4, ERCC1, ERCC2, GSTM1, XPC, and XRCC1.
CYP2C8*3 and the ABCB1 SNPs C1236T, G2677T/A, and C3435T were not statistically significantly correlated to overall survival, sensoric neuropathy, and neutropenia in 119 patients treated for ovarian cancer with paclitaxel/carboplatin.
The purpose of this study was to evaluate the role of sequence variants in the CYP2C8, ABCB1 and CYP3A4 genes and the CYP3A4 phenotype for the pharmacokinetics and toxicity of paclitaxel in ovarian cancer patients.
We assessed 27 selected polymorphisms based on previously described associations or putative functional effects in 16 key genes from pathways that may influence cellular sensitivity to taxanes (ABCB1, ABCC1, ABCC2, ABCG2, CDKN1A, CYP1B1, CYP2C8, CYP3A4, CYP3A5, MAPT, and TP53) and platinum (ABCC2, ABCG2, ERCC1, ERCC2, GSTP1, MPO, and XRCC1) using polymerase chain reaction and Pyrosequencing in 914 ovarian cancer patients from the Scottish Randomised Trial in Ovarian Cancer phase III trial who were treated at presentation with carboplatin and taxane regimens after cytoreductive surgery.
Paclitaxel, an antineoplastic agent used for the treatment of ovarian cancer, is metabolized by cytochrome P450 (CYP)3A4 and CYP2C8 and is excreted from cells by ATP-binding cassette (ABCB1) (multi-drug resistance [MDR1], P-glycoprotein).
We therefore examined the relationship of the paclitaxel pharmacokinetics in 13 patients with ovarian cancer to polymorphisms in CYP2C8, CYP3A5, ABCB1, and PXR.
Interindividual differences in the pharmacokinetics of paclitaxel and its metabolites in Japanese ovarian cancer patients were investigated in relation to genetic polymorphisms of the CYP2C8, CYP3A4, and MDR1 genes.
In the inner ear, the role of KCNE3 is undefined, despite its association with Meniere disease and tinnitus.
Somatic cell hybrid clones were isolated from the fusion of RPC 5,4 mouse myeloma cells and B lymphocytes from three patients with agammaglobulinemia.
Microarray analysis of miRNAs expressed by Gtl2((-/+)) teratomas revealed decreased expression of 28 miRNAs encoded by the Dlk1-Dio3 domain, low expression of embryonic stem cell-specific miRNAs and dysregulation of miRNAs involved in tumorigenesis.
This study suggests that downregulation of ncRNAs in the Dlk1-Dio3 domain leads to enhanced teratoma growth and repression of stem cell markers.
Together, our results showed that the inflammatory environment mimic TNF-Alfa inhibits osteogenesis via upregulation of miR-146a and subsequent downregulation of Smad4, thus suggesting that therapeutic manipulation of miR-146a maybe a potential strategy to improve osteogenesis in the context of osteoporosis.
Smad4 is an intracellular effector of the TGFBeta family that has been implicated in Myhre syndrome, a skeletal dysplasia characterized by short stature, brachydactyly and stiff joints.
In acute myeloid leukemia (AML), the transcription factors CEBPA and KLF4 as well as the universal tumor suppressor p53 are frequently deregulated.
Furthermore, screening with a defined threshold identified 6 genes that were highly expressed in GBM, including AFF2, CACNA2D3 and ARPP21, while the 6 highly expressed genes in OD notably included CNTN2.
lilliputian (lilli), the sole Drosophila member of the FMR2/AF4 (Fragile X Mental Retardation/Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia) family of transcription factors, is widely expressed with roles in segmentation, cellularization, and gastrulation during early embryogenesis with additional distinct roles at later stages of embryonic and postembryonic development.
AF4 gene, frequently translocated with mixed-lineage leukemia (MLL) in childhood acute leukemia, encodes a putative transcriptional activator of the AF4/LAF4/FMR2 (ALF) protein family previously implicated in lymphopoiesis and Purkinje cell function in the cerebellum.
Members of the AF4/FMR2 family of nuclear proteins are involved in human diseases such as acute lymphoblastic leukemia and mental retardation.
Importantly, glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) patient tumors bearing TERT promoter mutations (C228T and C250T) known to be associated with increased telomerase activity; exhibited elevated Nrf2 and TKT expression and decreased glycogen accumulation.
To investigate the functional mechanism of metadherin (MTDH), hypoxia-inducible factor-1 alpha (HIF-1Alfa) and transketolase-like gene 1 (TKTL1) and their interaction with each other in laryngeal carcinoma development.
The positive expression rate of MTDH, HIF-1Alfa and TKTL1 in the 30 cases of laryngeal carcinoma was 56.67%, 60.00% and 63.33%, respectively, which was 20.00%,10.00% and 15.00% respectively in the para-carcinoma tissue, the difference of the positive expression rate of the tested objects between these two groups was statistically significant (P &lt; 0.05 or P &lt; 0.01).
Of the 30 cases of laryngeal carcinoma, the positive expression rate of MTDH, HIF-1Alfa and TKTL1 in the cases with lymphnode metastasis was 84.62%, 84.62% and 79.62%, respectively, compared with the rate in those without lymph nodes metastasis, which was 35.29%, 41.18% and 35.29%.
The positive expression rate of TKTL1 in laryngeal carcinoma at stage I-II was 25.00% and that at stage III-IV was 72.22%, the difference between which was statistically significant (P &lt; 0.05).
The Spearman's rank correlation analysis showed that the positive expression rates of MTDH and HIF-1Alfa in laryngeal carcinoma had positive correlation (r = 0.384, P &lt; 0.05); the positive expression rates of TKTL1 and HIF-1Alfa in laryngeal carcinoma had positive correlation (r = 0.508, P &lt; 0.01); But there was no significant correlation between the positive expression rates of MTDH and TKTL1 in laryngeal carcinoma (r = -0.107, P &gt; 0.05).
MTDH and TKTL1 may be expected to be new clinical targets for laryngeal carcinoma treatment and it could offer theoretical basis for the prognosis of the laryngeal carcinoma.
The present study evaluates the role of TKTL1 as a mediator of disease progression in melanoma associated with a defective methylation phenotype.
The expression of TKTL1 in metastatic melanoma tumors and cell lines was analysed by qRT-PCR and immunohistochemistry.
The promoter methylation status of TKTL1 in melanoma cells was evaluated by quantitative methylation specific PCR.
Biochemical and molecular analyses such as glucose consumption, lactate production, invasion, proliferation and cell cycle progression together with ectopic expression and siRNA mediated knockdown were used to investigate the role of TKTL1 in melanoma cells.
Expression of TKTL1 was highly restricted in normal adult tissues and was overexpressed in a subset of metastatic melanoma tumors and derived cell lines.
The TKTL1 promoter was activated by hypomethylation and treatment with 5aza induced TKTL1 expression in melanoma cells.
Augmented expression of TKTL1 in melanoma cells was associated with a glycolytic phenotype.
Loss and gain of function studies revealed that TKTL1 contributed to enhanced invasion of melanoma cells.
Our data provide evidence for an important role of TKTL1 in aerobic glycolysis and tumor promotion in melanoma that may result from defective promoter methylation.
This epigenetic change may enable the natural selection of tumor cells with a metabolic phenotype and thereby provide a potential therapeutic target for a subset of melanoma tumors with elevated TKTL1 expression.
After curative R0 tumor resection of primary OSCC (buccal mucosa), elevated epitope detection in monocytes (EDIM)-Apo10, EDIM-transketolase-like-1 (TKTL1), squamous cell carcinoma antigen (SCC-Ag), total serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), and its anaerobic isoforms (LDH-4, LDH-5) decreased to normal levels.
The morphology and immunoprofile of these renal neoplasms was compared with a control group of other sarcomas with BCOR genetic abnormalities, including clear cell sarcoma of the kidney (CCSK), infantile undifferentiated round cell sarcomas of soft tissue/primitive myxoid mesenchymal tumor of infancy, and bone/soft tissue sarcomas with BCOR-CCNB3 gene fusion; along with primary renal synovial sarcoma.
These results are in keeping with a "BCOR-alteration family" of renal and extrarenal neoplasms which includes CCSK and undifferentiated round cell sarcomas of soft tissue/primitive myxoid mesenchymal tumor of infancy (which typically harbor BCOR internal tandem duplication), and BCOR-CCNB3 sarcomas, all of which are primarily driven by BCOR overexpression and have overlapping (but not identical) clinicopathologic features.
Interaction of butyrate with its respective receptor (HCAR2) and transporter (SLC5A8), both expressed in the intestine, is associated with water and electrolyte absorption as well as providing defense against colon cancer and inflammation.
Furthermore, Slc5a8 protects against colitis and colon cancer under conditions of low-fibre intake but not when dietary fibre intake is optimal.
SLC5A8 (Solute carrier family 5, member 8), proposed to be a potential tumor suppressor gene, is down-regulated by epigenetic changes in some colorectal cancer cells, and ectopic expression of SLC5A8 in SLC5A8-deficient colon cancer cell lines leads to suppression of the colony-forming ability of these cells.
In this study, we showed that activin A up-regulated SLC5A8 expression in colorectal cancer RKO cells and human embryonic kidney (HEK) 293T cells.
miR-132 and miR-212 are tandem miRNAs whose expression is necessary for the proper development, maturation and function of neurons and whose deregulation is associated with several neurological disorders, such as Alzheimer's disease and tauopathies (neurodegenerative diseases resulting from the pathological aggregation of tau protein in the human brain).
As such, the 5-HT1A agonist, tandospirone, may be effective in preventing and/or treating motion sickness and/or space sickness.
Since 5-HT1A receptors are implicated in the pathogenesis of anxiety, depression, hallucinogenic behaviour, motion sickness and eating disorders, they are an important target for drug therapy.
Effective drugs for combating motion sickness include antihistamines, antimuscarinics, 5-HT1A (serotonergic) receptor agonists and neurokinin type 1 receptor antagonists.
Collectively, these results indicate that LY228729 is potent 5-HT1A agonist with bioavailability properties sufficient for clinical evaluation and with efficacy in preclinical models of anxiety, sexual disorders and motion sickness.
The antiemetic effects of six serotonergic 5-HT1A-receptor agonists, 8-hydroxy-2-(di-n-propylamino)tetrarin (8-OH-DPAT), 4-(4-[4-(2-pyrimidinyl)piperazin-1-yl]butyl)-2,3,4,5- tetrahydro-1,4-benzoxazepine-3,5-dione (SUN8399), buspirone, gepirone, ipsapirone and tandospirone, against motion sickness were investigated in Suncus murinus.
These results suggest that serotonergic 5-HT1A-receptor agonists are effective as anti-motion sickness drugs, and these drugs may block a common mechanism(s) for the emetic reflex of the suncus because the antiemetic effects of the 5-HT1A-receptor agonists were exerted irrespective of the stimulus.
Although metergoline produced a decrease in the antiemetic effect of DPAT, the decrease could not be clearly attributed to interactions with 5-HT1A receptors because metergoline alone slightly enhanced motion sickness.
These data indicate that there are different lncRNAs expressed in pancreatic cancer biology and that lncRNA BC008363 may be a novel biomarker for the prognosis of pancreatic cancer.
We identified a number of novel target genes downstream of ATP6AP2 knock-down that were related to the primary cilium (Bbs-1, Bbs-3, Bbs-7, Rabl5, Ttc26, Mks-11, Mks-5, Mks-2, Tctn2, Nme7) and the cell cycle (Pierce1, Clock, Ppif).
We identified 17 individuals with exon-disruptive CNVs (18.5%), including 13 different deletions in eight BBS genes (BBS1, BBS2, ARL6/BBS3, BBS4, BBS5, BBS7, BBS9, and NPHP1) and a deletion and a duplication in other ciliopathy-associated genes (ALMS1 and NPHP4, respectively).
Screening of the remaining patients for six other genes (BBS3, BBS4, BBS6, BBS7, BBS9 and BBS12) revealed five novel mutations.
About 95% of phytoplasmas detected were very closely related to BBS phytoplasma strains BBS3-AR (subgroup 16SrI-E) and BBS1-MI (unidentified) identified previously, and 4.4% of phytoplasmas detected belonged to the pigeon pea witches'-broom phytoplasma group (16SrIX).
Seventeen patients harbored mutations in BBS1, 10 in BBS10, and 10 in other genes (BBS2, BBS3, BBS5, BBS7, and BBS12).
We identified the disease-causing mutation in six of the families studied, five of which had novel sequence variants in BBS3, BBS6, and BBS12.
Here, we demonstrate that individual knockdown of bbs1 and bbs3 results in the same prototypical phenotypes as reported previously for other BBS genes.
Risks for SDB and insomnia + SDB were both linked to heightened risk of CVD and diabetes; SLD was consistently linked with greater risk of CVD and diabetes in non-Veterans but less strongly and consistently in Veterans.
This study assessed the effects of surgical debridement (SD) and nonsurgical debridement (NSD), associated with amoxicillin and metronidazole, on clinical and immunological outcomes of residual pockets and adjacent healthy sites in patients with type 2 diabetes.
Diabetic macular edema (DME) with neurosensory retinal detachment (NSD) remains an important cause of visual loss in patients with diabetes.
Sulindac (SLD) exhibits both the highest inhibitory activity towards human aldose reductase (AR) among popular non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and clear beneficial clinical effects on Type 2 diabetes.
We evaluated the effect of sulodexide (SLD), a natural GSG used in albuminuria and ischemic diabetes treatment, on arterial relaxation and vascular morphological changes in a diabetic type I model.
Our experiments support the conclusion that SLD is a potential drug for improving endothelial dysfunction in diabetes.
The experimental design was appropriate since hypoglycemia and hyperglycemia were observed in fish under NSD whereas in normoglycaemic fish HSD induced changes in stress-related parameters similar to those reported in fish literature, such as increased levels of cortisol and glucose in plasma and decreased levels of glycogen in liver.
At day 30, diabetic animals with NSD or HSD exhibited hyperglycemia, lower body weight, glycosuria, diuresis, decrease natriuresis, increased SBP values and SGLT2 expression.
The objective of this study was to determine whether the management of type 2 diabetes (DM2) can be transferred from an internist to a nurse specialised in diabetes (NSD).
There were highest incidences of leucopenia (42.2%), neutropenia (36.2%) and lowest incidence of thrombocytopenia (53.0%) in GP arm compared to NP arm (77.8%, 67.7%, 12.1%) or TP arm (71.0%, 57.0%, 13.0%) statistically (P&lt;0.01 for all).
Notably, TBX2, TBX4, and TBX5 were downregulated and hypermethylated in lung CAFs, suggesting an association between epigenetic silencing of these factors and phenotypic alteration of lung fibroblasts in cancer.
T-box transcription factor 5 (TBX5), a member of the conserved T-box transcription factor family that functions in organogenesis and embryogenesis, has recently been identified as a critical player in cancer development.
The aim of this study was to determine the role of TBX5 in non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC).
Immunohistochemistry was used to detect the correlation between levels of TBX5 and clinicopathological features of NSCLC patients in tissue microarray.
Expression of TBX5 in NSCLC tissues and cell lines was evaluated by quantitative PCR and Western blot.
The role of TBX5 in regulating proliferation, colony formation, invasion, and apoptosis of NSCLC cells was evaluated in vitro.
