Threatened abortion is an entity. Apert syndrome is an entity. Acrodermatitis is an entity. Acromegaly is an entity. ACTH Syndrome, Ectopic is an entity. Acute bronchiolitis is an entity. Addison Disease is an entity. Papillary adenocarcinoma is an entity. Adenoma is an entity. Adjustment Disorders is an entity. 
Agricultural Workers' Diseases is an entity. Alzheimer's Disease is an entity. Retrograde amnesia is an entity. Amyloidosis is an entity. Anemia is an entity. Aplastic Anemia is an entity. Aneurysm, Dissecting is an entity. Angina, Unstable is an entity. Cutaneous Fibrous Histiocytoma is an entity. Anorexia is an entity. 
Aortic coarctation is an entity. Aortic Rupture is an entity. Aphonia is an entity. Arnold Chiari Malformation is an entity. Arterial insufficiency is an entity. Arthritis, Gouty is an entity. Arthritis, Infectious is an entity. Rheumatoid Arthritis is an entity. Arthrogryposis is an entity. Ascites is an entity. 
Ataxia Telangiectasia is an entity. Athetosis is an entity. Atrioventricular Block is an entity. Babesiosis is an entity. Balkan Nephropathy is an entity. Bejel is an entity. Benign Ovarian Neoplasm is an entity. Berylliosis is an entity. Biliary Tract Diseases is an entity. Urinary Bladder Calculi (disorder) is an entity. 
Neurogenic Urinary Bladder is an entity. Blast Phase is an entity. Blepharitis is an entity. Blepharophimosis is an entity. Bloom Syndrome is an entity. Bone Cysts is an entity. Bone Diseases, Endocrine is an entity. Bone neoplasms is an entity. Bordetella Infections is an entity. Borrelia Infections is an entity. 
Brain Death is an entity. Brain Diseases is an entity. Branchioma is an entity. Malignant neoplasm of breast is an entity. Breast Diseases is an entity. Brenner Tumor is an entity. Bronchitis is an entity. Bronchopneumonia is an entity. Calcinosis cutis is an entity. Noninfiltrating Intraductal Carcinoma is an entity. 
Adenocarcinoma, Scirrhous is an entity. Carcinosarcoma is an entity. Low Cardiac Output is an entity. Carotid Body Paraganglioma is an entity. Catalepsy is an entity. Cecal Neoplasms is an entity. Myoclonic Cerebellar Dyssynergia is an entity. Cerebral Arterial Diseases is an entity. Diffuse Cerebral Sclerosis of Schilder is an entity. Chancroids is an entity. 
child abuse behavior is an entity. Developmental Disabilities is an entity. Child Nutrition Disorders is an entity. Chlamydia Infections is an entity. Polyp in nasopharynx is an entity. Cholestasis is an entity. Choriocarcinoma is an entity. Choroideremia is an entity. Chronic gingivitis is an entity. Chylothorax is an entity. 
Cocaine Abuse is an entity. Cocaine withdrawal is an entity. Cocarcinogenesis is an entity. Cold intolerance is an entity. Ulcerative Colitis is an entity. Collagen Diseases is an entity. Colonic Diseases is an entity. Colonic Polyps is an entity. Colorectal Neoplasms is an entity. Common Bile Duct Neoplasms is an entity. 
Compartment syndromes is an entity. Conjunctival Diseases is an entity. Corn of toe is an entity. Coronary Vessel Anomalies is an entity. Coughing is an entity. Craniopharyngioma is an entity. Cri-du-Chat Syndrome is an entity. Crohn Disease is an entity. Cutis Laxa is an entity. Cyclothymic Disorder is an entity. 
Cystadenoma is an entity. Cystic Adenomatoid Malformation of Lung, Congenital is an entity. Cystitis is an entity. Sudden death is an entity. Delusions is an entity. Dermatitis Herpetiformis is an entity. Scleroderma is an entity. Dermatosis Papulosa Nigra is an entity. Developmental Coordination Disorder is an entity. Diaphragmatic Eventration is an entity. 
Diarrhea is an entity. Diphtheria is an entity. Iron Metabolism Disorders is an entity. Double Outlet Right Ventricle is an entity. Drug toxicity is an entity. Duodenal Diseases is an entity. Duodenal Ulcer is an entity. Dysentery is an entity. Dysmenorrhea is an entity. Dysuria is an entity. 
Ear Neoplasms is an entity. Echolalia is an entity. Encephalitis is an entity. Encephalomyelitis is an entity. Endometrial Hyperplasia is an entity. Entropion is an entity. Enuresis is an entity. Epilepsy, Generalized is an entity. Tonic-Clonic Epilepsy is an entity. Epilepsies, Myoclonic is an entity. 
Erythema Multiforme is an entity. Esophageal Varices is an entity. Euthyroid Sick Syndromes is an entity. Eye Abnormalities is an entity. Fungal eye infections is an entity. Eyelid Diseases is an entity. Factor XIII Deficiency is an entity. Fanconi Syndrome is an entity. Fascioliasis is an entity. Fatty Liver is an entity. 
Fenestration (morphologic abnormality) is an entity. Fibromuscular Dysplasia is an entity. Folic Acid Deficiency is an entity. Food Allergy is an entity. Fragile X Syndrome is an entity. Froehlich's Syndrome is an entity. Fuchs Endothelial Dystrophy is an entity. Herpes Zoster Oticus is an entity. Gerstmann-Straussler-Scheinker Disease is an entity. Gingival Hypertrophy is an entity. 
Gingivitis is an entity. Gingivosis is an entity. Glaucoma, Open-Angle is an entity. Glomerulonephritis, Membranoproliferative is an entity. Membranous glomerulonephritis is an entity. Glossalgia is an entity. Glycogen Storage Disease Type III is an entity. Glycogen Storage Disease Type VI is an entity. Glycogen Storage Disease Type VIII is an entity. Gonadal Dysgenesis, Mixed is an entity. 
Gout is an entity. Graft-vs-Host Disease is an entity. Groenouw's Dystrophies is an entity. Hallermann's Syndrome is an entity. Hamartoma is an entity. Hand Dermatoses is an entity. Hay fever is an entity. Sensorineural Hearing Loss (disorder) is an entity. Heart Neoplasm is an entity. Myocardial rupture is an entity. 
Hematocrit procedure is an entity. Hematological Disease is an entity. Hemorrhagic Disorders is an entity. Severe Dengue is an entity. Hemorrhagic Fever with Renal Syndrome is an entity. Herpes Labialis is an entity. Herpes Simplex Infections is an entity. Herpes zoster disease is an entity. Herpesviridae Infections is an entity. Hip pain is an entity. 
Histiocytosis, Non-Langerhans-Cell is an entity. Histoplasmosis is an entity. Hodgkin Disease is an entity. HTLV-II Infections is an entity. Hydatidiform Mole is an entity. Hydroa Vacciniforme is an entity. Hydrocephalus is an entity. Hypercalciuria is an entity. Hyperparathyroidism, Secondary is an entity. Disorders of Excessive Somnolence is an entity. 
Orbital separation excessive is an entity. Hyperthyroxinemia is an entity. Hypocalcemia is an entity. Hypohidrosis is an entity. Hypoparathyroidism is an entity. Hypothermia, natural is an entity. Immunoproliferative Small Intestinal Disease is an entity. Impulsive Behavior is an entity. Inflammatory Bowel Diseases is an entity. INJECTED EYE is an entity. 
Sleep Initiation and Maintenance Disorders is an entity. Intestinal Atresia is an entity. Iris Diseases is an entity. Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease is an entity. Actinic keratosis is an entity. Kidney Calculi is an entity. Cystic kidney is an entity. Medullary sponge kidney is an entity. Klippel-Trenaunay-Weber Syndrome is an entity. Kwashiorkor is an entity. 
Premature Obstetric Labor is an entity. Laryngeal Edema is an entity. Lathyrism is an entity. Laurence-Moon Syndrome is an entity. Leprosy is an entity. Leukemia, Mast-Cell is an entity. Acute myelomonocytic leukemia is an entity. Leukemia, Myelomonocytic, Chronic is an entity. Adult T-Cell Lymphoma/Leukemia is an entity. Leukemoid Reaction is an entity. 
Leukodystrophy is an entity. Leukoplakia, Oral is an entity. Leydig Cell Tumor is an entity. Lipomatosis, Multiple Symmetrical is an entity. Alcoholic Liver Diseases is an entity. Liver neoplasms is an entity. Lung Diseases, Fungal is an entity. Lupus Vulgaris is an entity. Lupus Erythematosus, Subacute Cutaneous is an entity. Lymphatic Metastasis is an entity. 
Lymphogranuloma Venereum is an entity. Lymphopenia is an entity. Macroglossia is an entity. Lipomatosis, Familial Benign Cervical is an entity. Primary malignant neoplasm of liver is an entity. Mammary Neoplasms, Experimental is an entity. Mandibular Neoplasms is an entity. Manic Disorder is an entity. Marijuana Abuse is an entity. Mastitis is an entity. 
Measles is an entity. Melena is an entity. Melnick-Needles Syndrome is an entity. Melorheostosis is an entity. Meningitis, Listeria is an entity. Mesothelioma is an entity. Metabolic Diseases is an entity. Microglossia is an entity. Mitral Valve Insufficiency is an entity. Mitral Valve Prolapse Syndrome is an entity. 
Mucopolysaccharidosis VI is an entity. Spinal Muscular Atrophy is an entity. Muscular Dystrophy is an entity. Myeloid Metaplasia is an entity. Myocarditis is an entity. Myopia is an entity. Nematode infections is an entity. Neonatal Abstinence Syndrome is an entity. Neoplasm Invasiveness is an entity. Neoplasm Seeding is an entity. 
Neoplasms, Multiple Primary is an entity. Nephrocalcinosis is an entity. Nervous System Neoplasms is an entity. Neurilemmoma is an entity. Neuritis is an entity. neurofibroma is an entity. Neurofibromatosis 2 is an entity. Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome is an entity. Neuromuscular Diseases is an entity. Nevus of Ota is an entity. 
Night sweats is an entity. Noonan Syndrome is an entity. Numbness is an entity. Odontogenic Cysts is an entity. Odontogenic Tumors is an entity. Onchocerciasis, Ocular is an entity. Delirium, Dementia, Amnestic, Cognitive Disorders is an entity. Osteitis Fibrosa Cystica is an entity. Massive Osteolyses is an entity. Osteopetrosis is an entity. 
Ovarian Carcinoma is an entity. Paget Disease Extramammary is an entity. Pustulosis of Palms and Soles is an entity. Panuveitis is an entity. Paraganglioma is an entity. Paranasal Sinus Neoplasms is an entity. Paresis is an entity. Paresthesia is an entity. Secondary Parkinson Disease is an entity. Gambling, Pathological is an entity. 
Pemphigus Vulgaris is an entity. Peyronie Disease is an entity. Suppurative Periapical Periodontitis is an entity. Peritonsillar Abscess is an entity. Philadelphia Chromosome is an entity. Phimosis is an entity. Photosensitivity Disorders is an entity. Pituitary Apoplexy is an entity. Platelet Count measurement is an entity. Pneumococcal Infections is an entity. 
Aspiration Pneumonia is an entity. Pneumoperitoneum is an entity. Postmortem Changes is an entity. Prader-Willi Syndrome is an entity. Pregnancy Complications, Infectious is an entity. Atrial Premature Complexes is an entity. Prenatal Exposure Delayed Effects is an entity. Priapism is an entity. Primary Insomnia is an entity. Prostatic Diseases is an entity. 
Pseudo-Hurler Polydystrophy is an entity. Psychoses, Drug is an entity. Purpura, Thrombotic Thrombocytopenic is an entity. Pyoderma is an entity. Babinski Reflex is an entity. Tick-borne relapsing fever is an entity. Reoviridae Infections is an entity. Respiratory Distress Syndrome, Adult is an entity. Respiratory Syncytial Virus Infections is an entity. Retinal Artery Occlusion is an entity. 
Retinal Diseases is an entity. Retinitis is an entity. Rhinitis is an entity. Rubinstein-Taybi Syndrome is an entity. Salmonella Infections, Animal is an entity. Sandhoff Disease is an entity. Cutaneous sarcoidosis is an entity. Sarcoidosis, Pulmonary is an entity. Schizophrenia, Catatonic is an entity. Schizophrenia, Childhood is an entity. 
Sea-Blue Histiocyte Syndrome is an entity. Seminoma is an entity. Senile lentigo is an entity. Disorders of Sex Development is an entity. Shoulder Pain is an entity. Shyness is an entity. Sialadenitis is an entity. Sigmoid Neoplasms is an entity. Sinus Thrombosis, Intracranial is an entity. Situs Inversus is an entity. 
Dermatologic disorders is an entity. Skin lesion is an entity. Skin tag is an entity. Skin Ulcer is an entity. Snoring is an entity. West Syndrome is an entity. Spastic Paraplegia is an entity. Spina Bifida Cystica is an entity. Spinal ataxia is an entity. Compression of spinal cord is an entity. 
Spinal Cord Neoplasms is an entity. Spinal Neoplasms is an entity. Spinocerebellar Degeneration is an entity. Spirochaetales Infections is an entity. Staphylococcal Scalded Skin Syndrome is an entity. Steatorrhea is an entity. Stevens-Johnson Syndrome is an entity. Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder is an entity. Sweat Gland Diseases is an entity. Congenital abnormal Synostosis is an entity. 
Taste Disorders is an entity. Telangiectasis is an entity. Temporomandibular Joint Dysfunction Syndrome is an entity. Thanatophoric Dysplasia is an entity. Thoracic Diseases is an entity. Thrombocythemia, Essential is an entity. Thrombocytopenia is an entity. Thymus Hyperplasia is an entity. Tic disorder is an entity. Tongue Neoplasms is an entity. 
Chromosomal translocation is an entity. Congenital Transposition is an entity. Transposition of Great Vessels is an entity. Tremor is an entity. Infection by Trichuris trichiura is an entity. Trismus is an entity. Tuberculoma is an entity. Tuberculosis, Laryngeal is an entity. Nephritis, Tubulointerstitial is an entity. Tularemia is an entity. 
Ulcer is an entity. Attention Deficit Disorder is an entity. Urethral Obstruction is an entity. Urethral Stricture is an entity. Urinary Calculi is an entity. Increased frequency of micturition is an entity. Urticaria is an entity. Uterine Diseases is an entity. Uterine Fibroids is an entity. Anterior uveitis is an entity. 
Vaginal Diseases is an entity. Vaginitis is an entity. Vasovagal syncope is an entity. Velopharyngeal Insufficiency is an entity. Ventricular Outflow Obstruction is an entity. Vesicovaginal Fistula is an entity. Visceral Myopathy is an entity. Low Vision is an entity. Vitamin B 12 Deficiency is an entity. Vitamin E Deficiency is an entity. 
Vitamin K Deficiency is an entity. Vocal Cord Paralysis is an entity. Werner Syndrome is an entity. Xeroderma is an entity. Xeroderma Pigmentosum is an entity. Yersinia infections is an entity. Zollinger-Ellison syndrome is an entity. Accelerated Idioventricular Rhythm is an entity. AIDS-Associated Nephropathy is an entity. Epidermolysis Bullosa Dystrophica is an entity. 
Ichthyosiform Erythroderma, Congenital is an entity. Lymphoma, Intermediate-Grade is an entity. Immunoblastic Large-Cell Lymphoma is an entity. Diffuse Mixed-Cell Lymphoma is an entity. Lymphoma, T-Cell, Cutaneous is an entity. Weber-Cockayne Syndrome is an entity. Cardiac Output, High is an entity. Eosinophilia-Myalgia Syndrome is an entity. Intracranial Tuberculoma is an entity. Polyendocrinopathies, Autoimmune is an entity. 
Angiodysplasia is an entity. Epilepsy, Complex Partial is an entity. Meningitis, Cryptococcal is an entity. Metabolic acidosis, NAG, acidifying salts is an entity. Normocytic anemia is an entity. Atrial arrhythmia is an entity. Onycholysis is an entity. Chronic gastritis is an entity. Alcohol abuse is an entity. Codependency is an entity. 
Depressive Syndrome is an entity. Secondary generalized epilepsy is an entity. Idiopathic Membranous Glomerulonephritis is an entity. Ileoanal Pouches is an entity. Cataract is an entity. Mucopolysaccharidosis Type IIIA is an entity. Mucopolysaccharidosis type IVB is an entity. Pseudopelade is an entity. Chronic sinusitis is an entity. Chronic tonsillitis is an entity. 
Acute Cholecystitis is an entity. Pancreatitis, Chronic is an entity. Epstein-Barr Virus Infections is an entity. Cellulitis of periorbital region is an entity. SALIVARY GLAND ABNORMALITY is an entity. Soft Tissue Infections is an entity. De Quervain Disease is an entity. Obstructive nephropathy is an entity. Feeling hopeless is an entity. Feeling powerless is an entity. 
Genital ulceration is an entity. Addisonian crisis is an entity. Thyroid Gland Follicular Adenoma is an entity. Anti-nuclear factor positive is an entity. Coagulation time prolonged is an entity. Disease of mucous membrane is an entity. Periosteal Disorder is an entity. Porphyruria is an entity. Thrombosis of cerebral veins is an entity. Atrophy of pancreas is an entity. 
Lobomycosis is an entity. Echinococcus granulosus infection is an entity. Pustular psoriasis is an entity. Complete trisomy 18 syndrome is an entity. Hypoplastic Left Heart Syndrome is an entity. Hypertensive heart disease is an entity. Congenital ankyloblepharon is an entity. Cataract secondary to ocular disorder is an entity. Granulocytic Sarcoma is an entity. Common ventricle is an entity. 
Sprengel deformity is an entity. Primary tuberculosis is an entity. Malignant neoplasm of oropharynx is an entity. Hypopharyngeal Cancer is an entity. Kaposi's sarcoma of palate is an entity. Benign neoplasm of thyroid gland is an entity. Thyrotoxicosis with toxic single thyroid nodule is an entity. Recurrent major depressive episodes is an entity. Hyperkinetic conduct disorder of childhood is an entity. Myopia, Degenerative is an entity. 
Acute angle-closure glaucoma is an entity. Bullous keratopathy is an entity. Recurrent erosion of cornea is an entity. Pseudopapilledema is an entity. Vitreous degeneration is an entity. Benign Paroxysmal Positional Vertigo is an entity. Acute myocarditis is an entity. Trifascicular block is an entity. Chronic nasopharyngitis is an entity. Allergic asthma is an entity. 
Crohn's disease of large bowel is an entity. Gastrointestinal tract vascular insufficiency is an entity. Hypertrophy of kidney is an entity. Atrophy of testis is an entity. Vibratory urticaria is an entity. Swelling of limb is an entity. Cleft palate with cleft lip is an entity. Congenital cytomegalovirus infection is an entity. Neonatal thyrotoxicosis is an entity. Convulsions in the newborn is an entity. 
Polyarthralgia is an entity. Joint stiffness is an entity. Contact hypersensitivity is an entity. Malnutrition is an entity. Caroli Disease is an entity. Colitis, Ischemic is an entity. Akathisia, Drug-Induced is an entity. Citrullinemia is an entity. Congenital absent nipple is an entity. Gammopathy is an entity. 
Blood basophil count (lab test) is an entity. Alkaline phosphatase measurement is an entity. Atrial natriuretic factor (ANF) measurement is an entity. Dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate measurement (procedure) is an entity. Phospholipid measurement is an entity. Carcinomatosis is an entity. Hereditary Opalescent Dentin (disorder) is an entity. Diabetes, Autoimmune is an entity. Hemangioma, Intramuscular is an entity. Pleomorphic Lipoma is an entity. 
Sarcoma, Spindle Cell is an entity. Lung Diseases, Interstitial is an entity. CREST Syndrome is an entity. Idiopathic Hypereosinophilic Syndrome is an entity. Eosinophilic leukemia is an entity. Diabetic Foot is an entity. Leukoplakia, Hairy is an entity. Amyloid Neuropathies is an entity. Arterivirus Infections is an entity. Adenomyoma is an entity. 
Mesoblastic Nephroma is an entity. Angiomyolipoma is an entity. Liposarcoma, Myxoid is an entity. Giant Cell Tumor of Bone is an entity. Histiocytoma, Benign Fibrous is an entity. Gonadoblastoma is an entity. Adenomatosis, Pulmonary is an entity. Adenomatous Polyps is an entity. Cystadenocarcinoma, Papillary is an entity. Pilomatrixoma is an entity. 
Ganglioglioma is an entity. Ganglioneuroblastoma is an entity. Neurofibrosarcoma is an entity. Neuroendocrine Tumors is an entity. adult soft tissue sarcoma is an entity. childhood soft tissue sarcoma is an entity. Metastatic malignant neoplasm to brain is an entity. Pfeiffer Syndrome is an entity. Acrodysostosis is an entity. KBG syndrome is an entity. 
POLYDACTYLY, POSTAXIAL is an entity. Shprintzen syndrome is an entity. Biotinidase Deficiency is an entity. Vagina absent is an entity. Congenital hypoplasia of adrenal gland is an entity. Ketoacidosis is an entity. Cyclic neutropenia is an entity. Familial generalized lipodystrophy is an entity. Paramyotonia Congenita (disorder) is an entity. Mobius Syndrome is an entity. 
Alkalemia is an entity. Muscular stiffness is an entity. Lytic lesion is an entity. Urticaria due to cold is an entity. Vascular ring is an entity. Neck webbing is an entity. Trichiasis is an entity. Elastosis perforans serpiginosa is an entity. Relative erythrocytosis is an entity. Brachycephaly is an entity. 
Melanosis coli is an entity. Lesion of brain is an entity. Obstruction of bronchus is an entity. Brachial Plexus Neuritis is an entity. Structure of wormian bone is an entity. Jet Lag Syndrome is an entity. Muscle fibrillation is an entity. Gait, Shuffling is an entity. Dyspnea on exertion is an entity. Feeding difficulties is an entity. 
Abdominal discomfort is an entity. Functional proteinuria is an entity. Intermenstrual heavy bleeding is an entity. Cullen's sign is an entity. Premature birth of newborn is an entity. Euthymic mood is an entity. Hyperirritability is an entity. Disorder of form of thought is an entity. Incoherent thinking is an entity. Clumsiness is an entity. 
Hyperexplexia is an entity. Indifference to pain is an entity. Apraxic is an entity. Facial grimacing is an entity. Acute urticaria is an entity. Peripheral motor neuropathy is an entity. Neurotoxicity Syndromes is an entity. Respiratory Depression is an entity. acute mania is an entity. Retinal damage is an entity. 
Wasting is an entity. hemolytic reaction is an entity. Galactorrhea not associated with childbirth is an entity. Congenital hernia is an entity. Congenital diaphragmatic hernia is an entity. Cerebral atrophy is an entity. Disorder of ejaculation is an entity. Hepatic enzyme increased is an entity. Aura is an entity. Polyposis, Gastric is an entity. 
Mucosal ulcer is an entity. Menopausal symptom is an entity. SLE-LIKE SYMPTOMS is an entity. Pick Disease of the Brain is an entity. Alcohol-Related Disorders is an entity. Cocaine-Related Disorders is an entity. Bipolar II disorder is an entity. Amphetamine Addiction is an entity. Selective Mutism is an entity. Ependymoma of brain is an entity. 
Carcinoma of Male Breast is an entity. Intraductal papilloma of breast is an entity. Cerebral Angiitis is an entity. Xanthomatosis, Cerebrotendinous is an entity. Necrotizing fasciitis is an entity. Gastrointestinal Stromal Tumors is an entity. Lymphedema praecox is an entity. Hereditary pancreatitis is an entity. Male Pseudohermaphroditism is an entity. PULMONARY LYMPHANGIOMYOMATOSIS is an entity. 
Thrombosis of renal vein is an entity. Bone marrow megaloblastic (finding) is an entity. Conjunctival telangiectasis is an entity. Facial erythema is an entity. Blonde hair is an entity. Tremor of hands is an entity. Fibrosis, Liver is an entity. Elevated serum IgA is an entity. Hyperreflexia in knees is an entity. Convex nasal ridge is an entity. 
Byzanthine arch palate is an entity. Personality change is an entity. Vertical Talus is an entity. Romberg's sign positive is an entity. Serum ferritin decreased is an entity. Vascular abnormalities is an entity. Global brain atrophy is an entity. Pulmonary congestion is an entity. Thrombotic stroke is an entity. Hypoxia is an entity. 
McCune-Albright Syndrome is an entity. Sheehan Syndrome is an entity. Azotemia is an entity. Bare Lymphocyte Syndrome is an entity. Neoplasm, Residual is an entity. Oxidative Stress is an entity. Bronchiolitis Obliterans Organizing Pneumonia is an entity. Nephropathia Epidemica is an entity. Fibrous Dysplasia is an entity. Compound nevus of skin is an entity. 
Telangiectatic osteosarcoma is an entity. Compression fracture of vertebral column is an entity. Osteopenia/osteoporosis is an entity. Keratosis pilaris is an entity. Linear Scleroderma is an entity. Cutis verticis gyrata is an entity. Tumoral calcinosis is an entity. Narrowing of intervertebral disc space is an entity. Rotator cuff syndrome is an entity. Calcification of trachea is an entity. 
Bronchomalacia is an entity. Late onset asthma is an entity. Chronic nonspecific lung disease is an entity. Acute heart failure is an entity. Rheumatic disease of heart valve is an entity. Rheumatic mitral stenosis is an entity. Familial cardiomyopathy is an entity. Myxoid transformation of mitral valve is an entity. Second degree atrioventricular block is an entity. Systemic Vasculitis is an entity. 
Thromboangiitis is an entity. Idiopathic arterial calcification of infancy is an entity. Capillary thrombosis is an entity. Chronic cerebral ischemia is an entity. Nager syndrome is an entity. Popliteal pterygium syndrome is an entity. Multiple pterygium syndrome is an entity. Achondrogenesis, type IB (disorder) is an entity. Atelosteogenesis, type 1 is an entity. Baller-Gerold syndrome is an entity. 
Turcot syndrome (disorder) is an entity. Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba Syndrome is an entity. Rieger syndrome is an entity. Urethral obstruction sequence is an entity. Congenital anomaly of skeletal bone is an entity. Trigonocephaly is an entity. Mirror hands is an entity. Congenital hemivertebra is an entity. Congenital absence of lung is an entity. Congenital hypoplasia of pulmonary artery is an entity. 
Erythrokeratodermia variabilis is an entity. Porokeratosis, Disseminated Superficial Actinic is an entity. Acrokeratosis Verruciformis of Hopf is an entity. Birthmark is an entity. Mongolian Spot is an entity. Premature tooth eruption is an entity. Deep overbite is an entity. Posterior lingual occlusion of mandibular teeth is an entity. Congenital lip pits is an entity. Cleft uvula is an entity. 
Congenital duplication of intestine is an entity. Ectopic adrenal cortex is an entity. Unilateral agenesis of kidney is an entity. Persistent umbilical sinus is an entity. Congenital absence of ovary is an entity. Lissencephaly is an entity. Neuronal heterotopia is an entity. Spina bifida of cervical region is an entity. Axenfeld anomaly (disorder) is an entity. Preauricular dimple is an entity. 
Cyclocephaly is an entity. Short cord is an entity. Acute gastrointestinal hemorrhage is an entity. Angiodysplasia of colon is an entity. Crohn's disease of the ileum is an entity. Typhlitis is an entity. Ileocolic intussusception is an entity. Osmotic diarrhea is an entity. Leiomyomatosis peritonealis disseminata is an entity. Acute hepatitis is an entity. 
Pancreatitis, Acute Necrotizing is an entity. Adult-onset obesity is an entity. Hypocupremia is an entity. Chronic tophaceous gout is an entity. Orotic aciduria is an entity. Xeroderma pigmentosum, group B is an entity. Xeroderma pigmentosum, group F is an entity. Congenital glucose-galactose malabsorption is an entity. Lipofuscinosis is an entity. Pseudovaginal Perineoscrotal Hypospadias is an entity. 
Progressive intrahepatic cholestasis (disorder) is an entity. Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type 2 is an entity. Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome, Type IV is an entity. Osteogenesis imperfecta with blue sclerae AND normal teeth is an entity. Osteogenesis imperfecta, recessive perinatal lethal is an entity. Localized amyloidosis is an entity. Aminoacidemia is an entity. Hyperlysinemias is an entity. Isovaleryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency is an entity. Hyper-beta-alaninemia is an entity. 
succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase deficiency is an entity. Acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency is an entity. Acute nephropathy is an entity. Salt-losing nephropathy is an entity. Arteriolar nephrosclerosis is an entity. Acquired renal cystic disease is an entity. Chronic cervicitis is an entity. Endometrioma is an entity. Perinatal disorder is an entity. Schizoaffective disorder, bipolar type is an entity. 
Coprophilia (disorder) is an entity. Neonatal maladjustment syndrome is an entity. Bing-Neel syndrome is an entity. Striatonigral Degeneration is an entity. Familial Motor Neuron Disease is an entity. Motor Neuron Disease, Lower is an entity. Myoclonic Epilepsy, Juvenile is an entity. Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, Type 1C is an entity. Supranuclear paralysis is an entity. Multi-core congenital myopathy is an entity. 
Zebra body myopathy is an entity. Absent anterior chamber of eye is an entity. Aphakic glaucoma is an entity. Cortical cataract is an entity. Corneal guttata is an entity. Orbital congestion is an entity. Periodic Alternating Nystagmus is an entity. Chronic otitis media is an entity. Female hypogonadism syndrome is an entity. Sensory polyneuropathy is an entity. 
Mixed sensory-motor polyneuropathy is an entity. Hyperplasia of pancreatic islet beta cell is an entity. Fasting Hypoglycemia is an entity. Hypothyroidism, Congenital, Nongoitrous, 4 is an entity. Subclinical hypothyroidism is an entity. Severe hypothyroidism is an entity. Autoimmune hypoparathyroidism is an entity. Congenital dyserythropoietic anemia, type III is an entity. Pyridoxine-responsive sideroblastic anemia is an entity. Anemia due to infection is an entity. 
Disorder of neutrophils is an entity. eosinophilic syndrome is an entity. Chronic granulomatous disease, type II is an entity. Thrombocytopenia due to sequestration is an entity. von Willebrand disease, type IID is an entity. Chronic mountain sickness is an entity. Toxic effect of heavy metal is an entity. Coinfection is an entity. Tuberculosis of intestines is an entity. Escherichia coli septicemia is an entity. 
Respiratory syncytial virus bronchiolitis is an entity. Human immunodeficiency virus II infection is an entity. Pneumonia associated with AIDS is an entity. Flea Infestation is an entity. Dry hair is an entity. Abnormal mental state is an entity. Psychological addiction is an entity. Hemifacial Spasm is an entity. Stage II Colon Cancer is an entity. Non-small cell lung cancer stage I is an entity. 
Metastatic Ewing's Sarcoma is an entity. refractory plasma cell neoplasm is an entity. Ovarian epithelial cancer stage III is an entity. Ovarian epithelial cancer recurrent is an entity. Gastric Adenocarcinoma is an entity. Small cell lung cancer recurrent is an entity. recurrent adult acute lymphoblastic leukemia is an entity. relapsing chronic myelogenous leukemia is an entity. Recurrent Thyroid Carcinoma is an entity. Non-small cell lung cancer stage IIIA is an entity. 
B-cell adult acute lymphoblastic leukemia is an entity. alveolar childhood rhabdomyosarcoma is an entity. Squamous cell carcinoma of esophagus is an entity. Anal carcinoma is an entity. Transitional cell carcinoma of bladder is an entity. Thymoma, type B3 is an entity. pituitary eosinophilic adenoma is an entity. Laryngeal cancer recurrent is an entity. childhood neurofibrosarcoma is an entity. Leiomyosarcoma of uterus is an entity. 
Juvenile Pilocytic Astrocytoma is an entity. Squamous cell carcinoma of vulva is an entity. Respiratory papilloma is an entity. Sexual abuse is an entity. Landau-Kleffner Syndrome is an entity. Hemorrhagic Fever, Ebola is an entity. Disease caused by Shigella dysenteriae is an entity. Erythrophagocytosis is an entity. Mandibular hyperplasia is an entity. depressive personality is an entity. 
Cryptophthalmos is an entity. Fundus Albipunctatus is an entity. Lupus anticoagulant disorder is an entity. Myopathic facies is an entity. Congenital stenosis is an entity. Congenital hemihypertrophy is an entity. Congenital hypopigmentation is an entity. Pseudocyst is an entity. Inflammatory disease of mucous membrane is an entity. Granulovacuolar degeneration is an entity. 
Segmental demyelination is an entity. Segmental glomerulosclerosis is an entity. Tumor necrosis is an entity. Deep caries is an entity. Giant platelet (morphologic abnormality) is an entity. Carcinoma, diffuse type is an entity. Comedocarcinoma, noninfiltrating is an entity. Non-infiltrating lobular carcinoma is an entity. Infiltrating duct and lobular carcinoma is an entity. Pheochromocytoma, malignant is an entity. 
Spindle Cell Melanoma is an entity. Round cell liposarcoma is an entity. Cellular leiomyoma is an entity. Synovial sarcoma, biphasic is an entity. Mixed Germ Cell Tumor is an entity. Arteriovenous hemangioma is an entity. Myxoid chondrosarcoma is an entity. Retinoblastoma, differentiated is an entity. Malignant lymphomatous polyposis is an entity. Chief cell adenocarcinoma is an entity. 
C cell tumor is an entity. Glucose measurement is an entity. Tyrosine measurement is an entity. Cerebral venous sinus thrombosis is an entity. Amnesia, Transient Global is an entity. Psychotic episodes is an entity. Drug-induced depressive state is an entity. Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder, Predominantly Inattentive Type is an entity. Seasonal allergic conjunctivitis is an entity. Salzmann's nodular dystrophy is an entity. 
Corneal dystrophy, Lattice type 3 is an entity. Anterior uveitis idiopathic is an entity. Cilioretinal artery occlusion is an entity. Venous retinal branch occlusion is an entity. Autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa is an entity. Horizontal gaze palsy is an entity. Lung disease with systemic sclerosis is an entity. Fungal pneumonia is an entity. Chylothorax, congenital is an entity. Familial mitral valve prolapse is an entity. 
Subaortic stenosis is an entity. Induced ventricular tachycardia is an entity. Sporadic primary pulmonary hypertension is an entity. Hyperplastic lymph node is an entity. Congenital neutropenia is an entity. Splenic atrophy is an entity. Hypertrophy of parotid gland is an entity. Lip pit is an entity. Idiopathic chronic pancreatitis is an entity. Cystadenoma of pancreas is an entity. 
Bifid scrotum is an entity. Hypothalamic amenorrhea is an entity. Thyroid Dyshormonogenesis 4 is an entity. Iodine deficiency syndrome is an entity. Multinodular goiter is an entity. Maturity onset diabetes mellitus in young is an entity. Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus secretory diarrhea syndrome is an entity. Somatotroph hyperplasia is an entity. Salt-losing congenital adrenal hyperplasia is an entity. Premature adrenarche is an entity. 
Hypocalciuric hypercalcemia, familial, type 1 is an entity. Autosomal dominant hypophosphatemic rickets is an entity. Deficiency of Cobalamin G is an entity. Folate Malabsorption, Hereditary is an entity. Deficiency of mevalonate kinase is an entity. 3-Hydroxyisobutyric aciduria is an entity. GLYCOGEN STORAGE DISEASE Ic is an entity. Renal carnitine transport defect is an entity. Sialuria is an entity. Primary hypercholesterolemia is an entity. 
Familial hypercholesterolemia - homozygous is an entity. Wooly hair is an entity. Verotoxigenic Escherichia coli gastrointestinal tract infection is an entity. Gonococcal arthritis dermatitis syndrome is an entity. Anal warts is an entity. Systemic aspergillosis is an entity. Hepatosplenic schistosomiasis is an entity. Peripheral retinoschisis is an entity. Absence of pain sensation is an entity. Striae gravidarum is an entity. 
Ventricular tachycardia, polymorphic is an entity. Microprolactinoma is an entity. Macroprolactinoma is an entity. Coloboma of lens is an entity. Congenital posterior polar cataract is an entity. Cataract, congenital, cerulean type 1 is an entity. Aniridia type 2 is an entity. Polycoria is an entity. Pulmonary Atresia with Intact Ventricular Septum is an entity. Radial polydactyly is an entity. 
Accessory rib is an entity. Carcinoma of parotid gland is an entity. Benign neoplasm of lung is an entity. Adenoma of lung is an entity. Milium Cyst is an entity. Stage 0 Skin Melanoma is an entity. Verruciform xanthoma of skin is an entity. Malignant Mesothelioma of Peritoneum is an entity. Breast Cancer, Familial is an entity. Mucinous cystadenoma of ovary is an entity. 
Ovarian Embryonal Carcinoma is an entity. Endodermal sinus tumor of ovary is an entity. Multiple malignancy is an entity. Intestinal Cancer is an entity. Malignant neoplasm of large intestine is an entity. Secondary malignant neoplasm of pancreas is an entity. Carcinoma in situ of fallopian tube is an entity. Benign neoplasm of intestinal tract is an entity. Malignant neoplasm of central nervous system is an entity. Aplastic anemia, idiopathic is an entity. 
Chronic superficial gastritis is an entity. Mass of thyroid gland is an entity. Early gastric cancer is an entity. Pleomorphic adenoma of parotid gland is an entity. Primary melanocytic lesion of meninges is an entity. Pre B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia is an entity. Malignant lymphoma of testis is an entity. Congenital disorder of glycosylation type 1A is an entity. Trichoepithelioma is an entity. Dihydrotestosterone Assay is an entity. 
Ferritin measurement is an entity. Selenium measurement is an entity. Human T-cell lymphotrophic virus, type I [HTLV-I] is an entity. Human immunodeficiency virus, type 2 [HIV-2] infection in conditions classified elsewhere and of unspecified site is an entity. Hantavirus infection in conditions classified elsewhere and of unspecified site is an entity. Hemiplegia and hemiparesis is an entity. Diagnosis, Psychiatric is an entity. Premenstrual Tension is an entity. Gingival Overgrowth is an entity. Branchio-Oculo-Facial Syndrome is an entity. 
Akathisia is an entity. Nuclear cataract is an entity. Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis With Dementia is an entity. Pure hereditary spastic paraplegia is an entity. AICARDI-GOUTIERES SYNDROME is an entity. Dystonia Disorders is an entity. Sepsis-Associated Encephalopathy is an entity. Epilepsy with grand mal seizures on awakening (disorder) is an entity. Immersion Related Epilepsy is an entity. Polyradiculoneuropathy, Chronic Inflammatory Demyelinating is an entity. 
Pure Autonomic Failure is an entity. Familial infantile myasthenia is an entity. Pseudomyopathic myasthenia is an entity. Dominant sensorineural hearing loss is an entity. Lymphatic Abnormalities is an entity. Hypoplasminogenemia is an entity. Epstein syndrome (disorder) is an entity. Posttransfusion purpura is an entity. Hereditary C1 esterase inhibitor deficiency - dysfunctional factor is an entity. Carboxypeptidase N Deficiency is an entity. 
Immunodeficiency syndrome, variable is an entity. Developmental absence of tooth is an entity. Dentinogenesis imperfecta - Shield's type III (disorder) is an entity. Hereditary gingival fibromatosis is an entity. Uric acid urolithiasis is an entity. Congenital bilateral aplasia of vas deferens is an entity. Infective vaginitis is an entity. Granulomatous Mastitis is an entity. Sebaceous hyperplasia is an entity. Morbilliform Drug Reaction is an entity. 
Acrogeria, gottron type is an entity. Ectodermal Dysplasia, Hypohidrotic, Autosomal Recessive is an entity. Rudiger syndrome 1 is an entity. Keratoderma with scleroatrophy of the extremities is an entity. Seronegative arthritis is an entity. Rotator cuff tear arthropathy is an entity. Osteoarthrosis of the carpometacarpal joint of the thumb is an entity. Fukuyama Type Congenital Muscular Dystrophy is an entity. Autosomal Dominant Emery-Dreifuss Muscular Dystrophy (disorder) is an entity. Muscular Dystrophy, Scapulohumeral is an entity. 
Defect of articular cartilage is an entity. Chronic multifocal osteomyelitis is an entity. Adolescent idiopathic scoliosis is an entity. Hypermetric saccades is an entity. Opticociliary vessels is an entity. Cutaneous Fistula is an entity. Scaly skin is an entity. Overcurvature of nail is an entity. Brachyonychia is an entity. Distichiasis is an entity. 
Anxiety and fear is an entity. Compulsive hoarding is an entity. Response to pain finding is an entity. Periorbital swelling is an entity. Mobility poor is an entity. Urine looks dark is an entity. Long clavicle is an entity. Spastic Quadriplegia is an entity. Facial Paresis is an entity. Distal muscle weakness is an entity. 
Senile sclerosis of aortic cusp is an entity. QRS complex feature is an entity. Gastrointestinal sensation is an entity. Rhabdomyosarcoma with ganglionic differentiation is an entity. Papillary craniopharyngioma is an entity. Gillespie syndrome is an entity. Hamartoma of tongue is an entity. Bilateral renal hypoplasia is an entity. Defect of vertebral segmentation is an entity. Wolcott-Rallison syndrome is an entity. 
Opsismodysplasia is an entity. Metaphyseal chondrodysplasia Spahr type is an entity. Stuve-Wiedemann dysplasia is an entity. Pseudochondroplasia is an entity. Ichthyosis Bullosa of Siemens is an entity. Epidermolysis bullosa simplex with mottled pigmentation is an entity. Epidermolysis bullosa simplex, Ogna type is an entity. Epidermolysis bullosa, pretibial is an entity. Trisomy 21- mitotic nondisjunction mosaicism is an entity. 46, XY female is an entity. 
Post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorder is an entity. Myoclonic Encephalopathy is an entity. Transaminases increased is an entity. Periungual fibroma is an entity. Sensorineural hearing loss, bilateral is an entity. Hypospadias, penoscrotal is an entity. Growth delay is an entity. Large fontanelle is an entity. Cerebral dysgenesis is an entity. Simple Endometrial Hyperplasia is an entity. 
Enteropathy-Associated T-Cell Lymphoma is an entity. Blind Vision is an entity. Soft tissue mass is an entity. Chronic low back pain is an entity. Performance anxiety is an entity. Fecal peritonitis is an entity. Cryoglobulinemic glomerulonephritis is an entity. Corneal stromal edema is an entity. Chromophobe tumor is an entity. Halo nevus is an entity. 
Idiopathic infantile hypercalcemia - mild form is an entity. Alpha thalassemia-mental retardation syndrome is an entity. Papillary neoplasm is an entity. Metabolic symptoms is an entity. Dyslexia is an entity. Other primary thrombocytopenia is an entity. Alzheimer Disease, Late Onset is an entity. Benign neoplasm of eye, unspecified is an entity. Benign neoplasm of brain, unspecified is an entity. Cardiovascular Neoplasm is an entity. 
atopic eczema/dermatitis (non-specific) is an entity. Hemoglobin measurement is an entity. Fibrosis of bile duct is an entity. Coombs positive hemolytic anemia is an entity. Postoperative Nausea and Vomiting is an entity. Peritoneal Fibrosis is an entity. Bilateral cataracts (disorder) is an entity. Increased drug resistance is an entity. Delinquent behavior is an entity. Explosive speech is an entity. 
Humoral immune defect is an entity. Fructose-bisphosphate aldolase measurement is an entity. Mean Corpuscular Volume (result) is an entity. Pneumonic Plague is an entity. Pulmonary Thromboembolisms is an entity. Neuroendocrine disease or syndrome is an entity. Duodenal Cancer is an entity. Forgetful is an entity. Glycogen Storage Disease IXB is an entity. Nodular amyloidosis is an entity. 
Leukonychia totalis is an entity. Composite Lymphoma is an entity. Lung cyst is an entity. Preauricular Fistulae, Congenital is an entity. Visual disturbance is an entity. Fibromatosis colli is an entity. Mesomelia is an entity. Alcohol problem is an entity. Skin endocrine disorder is an entity. Brain hemorrhage is an entity. 
SERUM PHOSPHATE ELEVATED is an entity. Olfaction Disorders is an entity. Epstein-Barr virus hepatitis is an entity. Aggressive outburst is an entity. Chiari malformation type II is an entity. Multiple lung cysts is an entity. Global developmental delay is an entity. Edema of foot (finding) is an entity. Liver calculus is an entity. Sacroiliitis is an entity. 
Equilibration disorder is an entity. Long thorax is an entity. Short sternum is an entity. Thin clavicle is an entity. Narrowing of ear canal is an entity. Carotid Atherosclerosis is an entity. Portal hypertensive gastropathy is an entity. Serum testosterone level abnormal is an entity. Vertebral osteoporosis is an entity. Double coronary vessel disease is an entity. 
Acute asthma is an entity. Processing speed is an entity. Chronic sciatica is an entity. Retroperitoneal sarcoma is an entity. Minor oral aphthous ulceration is an entity. Laryngotracheomalacia is an entity. Alcohol Withdrawal Seizures is an entity. Costello syndrome (disorder) is an entity. Postoperative deep vein thrombosis is an entity. Carcinoma of larynx is an entity. 
Idiopathic scoliosis is an entity. Cardiovascular Infections is an entity. Cerebrovascular Occlusion is an entity. disabling disease is an entity. Biliary stricture is an entity. Monocytic leukemia is an entity. athymia is an entity. Infective cystitis is an entity. Toxic goiter is an entity. Obsessive compulsive behavior is an entity. 
Cardiopulmonary Arrest is an entity. Lung Diseases, Obstructive is an entity. CARCINOMA OF VULVA is an entity. Epithelial ovarian cancer is an entity. invasive cancer is an entity. Locally Advanced Malignant Neoplasm is an entity. sexual addiction is an entity. paternal alcoholism is an entity. Foodborne Disease is an entity. inflammatory joint disease is an entity. 
Deficiency of phosphoglycerate kinase is an entity. heart overload is an entity. Carcinoma in situ of lung is an entity. Gonadal dysgenesis XX type deafness is an entity. Splenic Hypoplasia is an entity. Malignant neoplasm of gastrointestinal tract is an entity. Secondary malignant neoplasm of lymph nodes of neck is an entity. Cancer Relapse is an entity. Malignant Female Reproductive System Neoplasm is an entity. Pulmonary aspiration is an entity. 
Multiple nevi is an entity. Dyssomnias is an entity. Radiculopathy is an entity. Spinal Muscular Atrophies of Childhood is an entity. Pyloric Stenosis, Hypertrophic is an entity. Constitutional aplastic anemia is an entity. Acne is an entity. Bacterial oral infection is an entity. Corneal infection is an entity. Severe nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy is an entity. 
Microalbuminuria is an entity. Acid-base disorders is an entity. Infarction, Middle Cerebral Artery is an entity. Diabetic peripheral neuropathy is an entity. Undifferentiated High Grade Pleomorphic Sarcoma of Bone is an entity. acute pneumonia is an entity. Hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis is an entity. carcinoma sarcoma is an entity. Catheter infection is an entity. Cerebellar lesions is an entity. 
Mass lesion of brain is an entity. diarrhea persistent is an entity. emotional dysfunction is an entity. gastric ulcer benign is an entity. Immune-complex glomerulonephritis is an entity. Metastatic hepatocellular carcinoma is an entity. lung disease granulomatous is an entity. Febrile Neutropenia is an entity. Polychondritis is an entity. polyglandular failure is an entity. 
Sarcoma, metastatic is an entity. Recurrent seizures is an entity. sick sinus is an entity. Chronic sinus disease is an entity. Thrombosis of subclavian vein is an entity. VAGINOSIS is an entity. Apraxia, Developmental Verbal is an entity. Brain Aneurysm is an entity. Communication Disorders, Developmental is an entity. Familial Dementia is an entity. 
Infantile Severe Myoclonic Epilepsy is an entity. Glycogen Storage Disease Type II, Infantile is an entity. Cystathionine beta-Synthase Deficiency Disease is an entity. Hypersomnia, Recurrent is an entity. Metachromatic leukodystrophy, juvenile type is an entity. Metachromatic Leukodystrophy, Infant is an entity. Metachromatic Leukodystrophy, Adult-Type (disorder) is an entity. Distal Muscular Dystrophies is an entity. X-Linked Emery-Dreifuss Muscular Dystrophy is an entity. Nerve Pain is an entity. 
Pelvic Cancer is an entity. Hyperphenylalaninaemia is an entity. Subarachnoid Hemorrhage, Aneurysmal is an entity. Malignant neoplasm tonsil is an entity. Hereditary Autosomal Dominant Spastic Paraplegia is an entity. Hereditary X-Linked Recessive Spastic Paraplegia is an entity. Common Carotid Artery Stenosis is an entity. Nemaline Myopathy, Autosomal Dominant is an entity. Machado-Joseph Disease Type III is an entity. Primary Progressive Nonfluent Aphasia is an entity. 
Nonketotic Hyperglycinemia is an entity. Nocturnal Myoclonus Syndrome is an entity. Myoclonic Epilepsies, Progressive is an entity. Action Myoclonus-Renal Failure Syndrome is an entity. Dentatorubral-Pallidoluysian Atrophy is an entity. Lafora Disease is an entity. Gait Ataxia is an entity. Pelizaeus-Merzbacher Disease, Atypical is an entity. Acute Cerebrovascular Accidents is an entity. Autosomal Dominant Parkinsonism is an entity. 
Central Nervous System Vascular Malformations is an entity. Dural Arteriovenous Fistula is an entity. Dyskinesias, Paroxysmal is an entity. Congenital Structural Myopathy is an entity. Sleep Arousal Disorders is an entity. Neuropsychiatric Systemic Lupus Erythematosus is an entity. Myotonia Fluctuans (disorder) is an entity. Chromosome 1, monosomy 1p is an entity. Trisomy 15 is an entity. Winter Shortland Temple syndrome is an entity. 
JACKSON-WEISS SYNDROME is an entity. Juberg-Marsidi syndrome is an entity. ATAXIA, FATAL X-LINKED, WITH DEAFNESS AND LOSS OF VISION is an entity. Blepharophimosis syndrome Ohdo type is an entity. 3C syndrome is an entity. MENTAL RETARDATION, X-LINKED, SNYDER-ROBINSON TYPE is an entity. STUVE-WIEDEMANN SYNDROME is an entity. MENTAL RETARDATION, X-LINKED 3 is an entity. Mental Retardation, X-Linked 9 is an entity. MENTAL RETARDATION, X-LINKED 18 is an entity. 
Acromegaloid facial appearance syndrome is an entity. Chromosome 11p deletion syndrome is an entity. upper GI cancer is an entity. malignant myeloma is an entity. Hypospadias is an entity. caruncle is an entity. Adenomatous polyp of colon is an entity. Pelvic pain female is an entity. Carcinoma in situ of uterine cervix is an entity. Infections of musculoskeletal system is an entity. 
Ectopic hormone secretion syndromes associated with neoplasias is an entity. Peritoneal infections is an entity. Gender disorders is an entity. Cervical cord compression is an entity. Low density lipoprotein decreased is an entity. distal ileal obstruction syndrome is an entity. Basal ganglion degeneration is an entity. Angiosarcoma non-metastatic is an entity. Recurrent Lung Carcinoma Cell Type Unspecified is an entity. Undifferentiated (Embryonal) Sarcoma is an entity. 
Hodgkin's disease refractory is an entity. Testicular malignant germ cell tumor is an entity. hyponatremic is an entity. Patellar subluxation is an entity. late onset epilepsy is an entity. Increased number of platelets is an entity. breast adenocarcinoma is an entity. angina symptom is an entity. Posterior subcapsular cataract is an entity. Idiopathic achalasia of esophagus is an entity. 
Retinoic acid syndrome is an entity. Medullary carcinoma of breast is an entity. Metastatic Prostatic Adenocarcinoma is an entity. Stage I Lung Cancer is an entity. Acute intravascular hemolysis is an entity. lupus erythematodes is an entity. pancolitis is an entity. Hyperkeratosis is an entity. Schimke immunoosseous dysplasia is an entity. Beta thalassemia trait is an entity. 
Peripheral demyelination is an entity. Dent's disease is an entity. Overactive Bladder is an entity. Optic Atrophy, Hereditary, Leber is an entity. Hypersomnia is an entity. Aphasia, Expressive is an entity. Progressive Muscular Atrophy is an entity. Upper Extremity Deep Vein Thrombosis, Primary is an entity. Protein C measurement is an entity. Hyperfibrinogenemia is an entity. 
Renal cancer metastatic is an entity. Overriding toe is an entity. aldosterone hypertension is an entity. Vitamin B 6 Deficiency is an entity. Primary Graft Dysfunction is an entity. Iridocele is an entity. Alloimmunisation is an entity. Intestinal adenocarcinoma is an entity. Carcinoma of peritoneum is an entity. Colorectal cancer metastatic is an entity. 
Convulsion in childhood is an entity. lymph node cancer is an entity. Adenocarcinoma of liver is an entity. Coronary spastic angina is an entity. Gonadal Agenesis is an entity. Spondylarthritis is an entity. Oxidative Phosphorylation Deficiencies is an entity. Macroangiopathy is an entity. Mean platelet volume decreased is an entity. Peripheral sensorimotor neuropathy is an entity. 
Nuclear non-senile cataract is an entity. Hemorrhagic Septicemia, Viral is an entity. Mental Retardation, X-Linked is an entity. HIV disease progression is an entity. Nevus cell nevus is an entity. Bacteremia due to Staphylococcus aureus is an entity. Gastrointestinal toxicity is an entity. Deafness, Sudden is an entity. inflammatory response is an entity. Epidermal necrosis is an entity. 
Coagulation factor measurement is an entity. CSF lactate increased is an entity. corneal melt is an entity. Thoracic kyphosis is an entity. Stenosis is an entity. Congenital absence of both testes is an entity. Bacterial sinusitis is an entity. Diffuse alveolar damage is an entity. Hepatitis, Drug-Induced is an entity. Peripheral axonal neuropathy is an entity. 
Diffuse telangiectasis is an entity. Traditional Serrated Adenoma is an entity. Atypical carcinoid tumor is an entity. Bronchiolo-alveolar carcinoma, non-mucinous is an entity. Fetal adenocarcinoma is an entity. Polymorphous low grade adenocarcinoma is an entity. Metaplastic carcinoma is an entity. Hepatoid adenocarcinoma is an entity. Solitary fibrous tumor is an entity. Atypical Lipoma is an entity. 
Clear cell chondrosarcoma is an entity. Large cell medulloblastoma is an entity. Myelodysplastic syndrome, no ICD-O subtype is an entity. Lower limb spasticity is an entity. Congenital ectopic pupil is an entity. Disorder of vitamin B12 is an entity. IgA pemphigus is an entity. Chylomicronemia syndrome is an entity. Hyperhidrosis Palmaris Et Plantaris is an entity. Scleroderma-like secondary cutaneous sclerosis is an entity. 
Drug-Induced Stevens Johnson Syndrome is an entity. Familial multiple trichoepitheliomata is an entity. Autosomal recessive hyper-IgM syndrome is an entity. Familial mastocytosis is an entity. Childhood atopic dermatitis is an entity. Adult atopic dermatitis is an entity. Acute interstitial pneumonia is an entity. Podoconiosis is an entity. Von Willebrand disease, platelet type is an entity. Vascular degeneration is an entity. 
Sterile keratitis is an entity. Ocular Cicatricial Pemphigoid is an entity. Metastasis from malignant tumor of prostate is an entity. von Willebrand disease type 2M is an entity. Fetal Nutrition Disorders is an entity. Plaque morphea is an entity. Cortisone reductase deficiency is an entity. Deficiency of phosphoserine phosphatase is an entity. Primary Effusion Lymphoma is an entity. Decreased vibratory sense is an entity. 
Single tumor is an entity. Aneurysm of aortic root is an entity. Multi vessel coronary artery disease is an entity. Perivascular Epithelioid Cell Neoplasms is an entity. Necrotic tumor is an entity. Precursor T cell lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoblastic lymphoma is an entity. Adenoma of large intestine is an entity. Cutaneous vascular malformation is an entity. Myopericytoma is an entity. Ankyloblepharon filiforme adnatum is an entity. 
Familial psoriasis is an entity. RDW - Red blood cell distribution width result is an entity. After-cataract is an entity. Acute encephalopathy is an entity. Congenital dyserythropoietic anemia, type II is an entity. Age at menarche is an entity. Stromal keratitis is an entity. Congenital melanocytic nevus is an entity. Asthmatic bronchitis is an entity. Postoperative confusion is an entity. 
Invasive Streptococcus pneumoniae disease is an entity. Astrocytic hamartoma is an entity. Torre-Muir syndrome is an entity. Congenital absence of parathyroid gland is an entity. Chordoid Glioma of the Third Ventricle is an entity. childhood chronic myelogenous leukemia is an entity. adult astrocytic tumors is an entity. Adenocarcinoma of ampulla of Vater is an entity. Biphasic Pulmonary Blastoma is an entity. Breast Liposarcoma is an entity. 
Calcifying Fibrous Pseudotumor is an entity. Central nervous system melanoma is an entity. Childhood Lymphoma is an entity. Childhood Pilocytic Astrocytoma is an entity. Colon Mucosa-Associated Lymphoid Tissue Lymphoma is an entity. Common Carcinoma is an entity. Diffuse infiltrative lymphocytosis syndrome is an entity. Barretts esophagus with dysplasia is an entity. Encapsulated Thymoma is an entity. Extragastrointestinal Gastrointestinal Stromal Tumor is an entity. 
Grade 3 Colon Adenocarcinoma is an entity. Hepatosplenic T-cell lymphoma is an entity. Hereditary Non-Polyposis Colon Cancer Type 2 is an entity. Infiltrating Bladder Urothelial Carcinoma is an entity. Large Cell Lung Neuroendocrine Carcinoma is an entity. Localized Carcinoma is an entity. Low Grade Gastric Intraepithelial Neoplasia is an entity. Metaplastic breast carcinoma is an entity. Breast Microglandular Adenosis is an entity. Midgut Carcinoid Tumor is an entity. 
Multifocal osteosarcoma is an entity. Neuroblastic Tumor is an entity. MEDULLOBLASTOMA WITH EXTENSIVE NODULARITY is an entity. Oligodendroglial Neoplasm is an entity. Carcinoma ex pleomorphic adenoma of parotid gland is an entity. Gastric Burkitt Lymphoma is an entity. Recurrent Follicular Lymphoma is an entity. Gastrointestinal stromal tumor of small intestine is an entity. Small Intestinal Neuroendocrine Neoplasm is an entity. Small Lymphocytic Lymphoma with Plasmacytoid Differentiation is an entity. 
Stage 3 Neuroblastoma is an entity. Thyroid Diffuse Large B-Cell Lymphoma is an entity. Thyroid Hyalinizing Trabecular Adenoma is an entity. Visual Manifestations is an entity. Pineal parenchymal tumor of intermediate differentiation is an entity. pancreatic gastrinoma is an entity. Aplastic bone marrow is an entity. Soft tissue perineurioma is an entity. Clear cell hidradenoma is an entity. Liposarcoma, well differentiated is an entity. 
carcinoma of the renal pelvis and ureter is an entity. Periosteal Osteosarcoma is an entity. Pleural Mesothelioma is an entity. hearing impairment is an entity. Single umbilical artery is an entity. Cesarean section (finding) is an entity. Caffeine dependence is an entity. Cyst of endometrium is an entity. Intrinsic Factor Deficiency is an entity. Bowel diverticulosis is an entity. 
Short palate is an entity. skin fold (abnormality) is an entity. Peripheral vascular insufficiency is an entity. Kidney damage is an entity. Mesenteric vascular insufficiency is an entity. RP23 gene is an entity. Avascular necrosis of the capital femoral epiphysis is an entity. Poor eye contact is an entity. Selective mutism specific to childhood and adolescence is an entity. Claudication (finding) is an entity. 
Aggressive reaction is an entity. Pyramidal tract syndrome is an entity. Infection by human herpesvirus 7 is an entity. Chronic iridocyclitis is an entity. Acrocephalosyndactylia is an entity. Human T-cell lymphotropic virus 1 infection is an entity. Separation anxiety disorder of childhood is an entity. Central topographic island is an entity. Multifocal choroiditis is an entity. Chronic pelvic pain syndrome is an entity. 
cancer angiogenesis is an entity. Cerebral seizure is an entity. Fibrinogen Adverse Event is an entity. Undifferentiated inflammatory arthritis is an entity. Retinochoroidopathy is an entity. Peripheral ulcerative keratitis is an entity. DNA Repair-Deficiency Disorders is an entity. Alport Syndrome, Autosomal Recessive is an entity. Usher Syndrome, Type I is an entity. Head titubation is an entity. 
Neurocytoma is an entity. Prominent epicanthal folds is an entity. Osteoblastic Osteosarcoma is an entity. Enchondroma is an entity. Primary Lung Lymphoma is an entity. Milroy Disease is an entity. Aldosterone-Producing Adrenal Cortex Adenoma is an entity. Colorectal Signet Ring Cell Carcinoma is an entity. Hereditary Diffuse Gastric Cancer is an entity. Hereditary Leiomyomatosis and Renal Cell Cancer is an entity. 
Invasive Skin Melanoma is an entity. Low grade myofibroblastic sarcoma is an entity. Papillary Thyroid Microcarcinoma is an entity. Pyothorax-Associated Lymphoma is an entity. Emphysema or COPD is an entity. Hard drusen is an entity. Episodic ataxia type 1 is an entity. AIDS-related small noncleaved cell lymphoma is an entity. Vitreous debris is an entity. Ectodermal Dysplasia 3, Anhidrotic is an entity. 
Latent Autoimmune Diabetes in Adults is an entity. Idiopathic Short Stature is an entity. Congenital ectodermal dysplasia of face is an entity. Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis is an entity. Extensively Drug-Resistant Tuberculosis is an entity. Intermittent hyperventilation is an entity. EPIDERMAL DIFFERENTIATION COMPLEX is an entity. Poor temperature regulation is an entity. Deafness, Autosomal Dominant 12 is an entity. Peroxisome biogenesis disorders is an entity. 
Athabaskan brainstem dysgenesis is an entity. CARDIOMYOPATHY, DILATED, 1C (disorder) is an entity. Ribbing disease is an entity. INFLAMMATORY BOWEL DISEASE 2 is an entity. Slow-growing hair is an entity. Restrictive heart failure is an entity. Retinitis Pigmentosa 18 is an entity. DIABETES MELLITUS, NONINSULIN-DEPENDENT, 2 (disorder) is an entity. DIABETES MELLITUS, INSULIN-DEPENDENT, 12 is an entity. Deafness, Autosomal Dominant 9 is an entity. 
Chromosome 11p11.2 Deletion Syndrome is an entity. Neuronal Intestinal Dysplasia, Type B is an entity. Anterior polar cataract 2 is an entity. Hypoparathyroidism familial isolated is an entity. ANOPHTHALMIA AND PULMONARY HYPOPLASIA is an entity. CARDIOMYOPATHY, DILATED, 1E is an entity. ARRHYTHMOGENIC RIGHT VENTRICULAR DYSPLASIA, FAMILIAL, 2 is an entity. DEAFNESS, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 6 is an entity. Proprotein Convertase 1 3 Deficiency is an entity. Long Qt Syndrome 4 is an entity. 
Autoamputation is an entity. SCHIZOPHRENIA 4 (disorder) is an entity. Subependymal cysts is an entity. Varicella, Severe Recurrent is an entity. CARNITINE PALMITOYLTRANSFERASE II DEFICIENCY, LATE-ONSET is an entity. CONE-ROD DYSTROPHY 1 (disorder) is an entity. Increased serum bone-specific alkaline phosphatase is an entity. OTITIS MEDIA, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO (finding) is an entity. Otodental Dysplasia is an entity. MASTOCYTOSIS WITH ASSOCIATED HEMATOLOGIC DISORDER is an entity. 
COLORECTAL CANCER, SOMATIC is an entity. Pigmentary retinal degeneration is an entity. Sick Sinus Syndrome 2, Autosomal Dominant is an entity. ALZHEIMER DISEASE, LATE-ONSET, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO is an entity. MYOPIA 2 (disorder) is an entity. MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, LIMB-GIRDLE, TYPE 1B (disorder) is an entity. Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy 1a is an entity. Spinal Muscular Atrophy, Childhood, Proximal, Autosomal Dominant is an entity. NEURONOPATHY, DISTAL HEREDITARY MOTOR, TYPE IIA is an entity. Hyporeflexia of lower limbs is an entity. 
CORONARY ARTERY DISEASE, DEVELOPMENT OF, IN HIV is an entity. MIRROR MOVEMENTS 1 is an entity. HOLOPROSENCEPHALY 2 (disorder) is an entity. MELANOMA, CUTANEOUS MALIGNANT, 2 is an entity. Premature calcification of mitral annulus is an entity. PSORIATIC ARTHRITIS, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO (finding) is an entity. Hyperkeratosis over edematous areas is an entity. Lymphedema, microcephaly and chorioretinopathy syndrome is an entity. Platyspondylic Lethal Skeletal Dysplasia, Torrance Type is an entity. Leri pleonosteosis is an entity. 
Diaphyseal thickening is an entity. Delayed coalescence of calcaneal ossification centers is an entity. TYLOSIS WITH ESOPHAGEAL CANCER is an entity. Vertebral body fusion is an entity. Vertebral arch abnormalities is an entity. Crossed fused renal ectopia is an entity. Normocytic hypoplastic anemia is an entity. DIABETES MELLITUS, TRANSIENT NEONATAL, 2 (disorder) is an entity. Prostate Cancer, Hereditary, 6 is an entity. MEPHENYTOIN, POOR METABOLISM OF is an entity. 
SARCOIDOSIS, EARLY-ONSET is an entity. Supranuclear Palsy, Progressive, 2 is an entity. Muscle weakness, progressive, proximal is an entity. Hypoplastic toes is an entity. DEAFNESS, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 48 is an entity. AUTOIMMUNE DISEASE, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 4 is an entity. CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, TYPE 4H is an entity. SPINOCEREBELLAR ATAXIA 26 is an entity. B-Cell Immunodeficiency, Distal Limb Anomalies, And Urogenital Malformations is an entity. Familial neurocardiogenic syncope is an entity. 
Muscle atrophy, lower limb, distal is an entity. SPINOCEREBELLAR ATAXIA, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 7 is an entity. MYOPIA 8 (disorder) is an entity. MYOPIA 7 (disorder) is an entity. Depressed nasal bridge is an entity. Silver-gray hair is an entity. Foveal Hypoplasia and Anterior Segment Dysgenesis is an entity. Low to undetectable plasma cortisol is an entity. Hyperthyroidism, Nonautoimmune is an entity. White eyelashes is an entity. 
White eyebrows is an entity. PANCREATIC AND CEREBELLAR AGENESIS is an entity. Hyporeflexia in the upper limbs is an entity. FANCONI ANEMIA, COMPLEMENTATION GROUP J is an entity. Arrhythmogenic Right Ventricular Dysplasia, Familial, 9 is an entity. Macular Dystrophy, Butterfly-Shaped Pigmentary, 2 is an entity. MYASTHENIC SYNDROME, CONGENITAL, ASSOCIATED WITH ACETYLCHOLINE RECEPTOR DEFICIENCY is an entity. Decreased muscle mass is an entity. Drug Metabolism, Poor, CYP2D6-Related is an entity. CORONARY HEART DISEASE, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 5 is an entity. 
Alpha-B Crystallinopathy is an entity. Dysplastic testes is an entity. Pyruvate dehydrogenase phosphatase deficiency is an entity. Insulin-Like Growth Factor I Deficiency is an entity. Thoracic hypoplasia is an entity. Dysplastic iliac wings is an entity. Decreased pain sensation is an entity. SPINOCEREBELLAR ATAXIA 20 is an entity. Oligodontia-Colorectal Cancer Syndrome is an entity. Progressive acroosteolysis of the clavicle is an entity. 
Decreased serum leptin is an entity. Syndactyly (4-5 toes) is an entity. MENTAL RETARDATION, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 3 is an entity. ABCD syndrome is an entity. MATURITY-ONSET DIABETES OF THE YOUNG, TYPE 3 (disorder) is an entity. Bone marrow biopsy shows erythroid hyperplasia is an entity. SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 6, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT (disorder) is an entity. RIPPLING MUSCLE DISEASE 1 is an entity. DIABETES MELLITUS, INSULIN-DEPENDENT, 5 is an entity. Oculomaxillofacial dysostosis is an entity. 
WAARDENBURG SYNDROME, TYPE 2B (disorder) is an entity. SPINAL MUSCULAR ATROPHY, DISTAL, CONGENITAL NONPROGRESSIVE (disorder) is an entity. LONG QT SYNDROME 3, ACQUIRED, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO (finding) is an entity. CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL, WITH CONDUCTION DISTURBANCE is an entity. Cerebral Autosomal Recessive Arteriopathy with Subcortical Infarcts and Leukoencephalopathy is an entity. Pancreatic beta cell agenesis with neonatal diabetes mellitus is an entity. Macrocytosis, Familial is an entity. Deformed rib cage is an entity. MUSCLE STIFFNESS, PAINFUL is an entity. DEAFNESS, AMINOGLYCOSIDE-INDUCED is an entity. 
Nephropathy, Chronic Tubulointerstitial is an entity. MITOCHONDRIAL COMPLEX I DEFICIENCY is an entity. LEBER OPTIC ATROPHY AND DYSTONIA is an entity. Spermatogenic Failure, Nonobstructive, Y-Linked is an entity. SPATIAL VISUALIZATION, APTITUDE FOR is an entity. Two carpal ossification centers present at birth is an entity. Decreased number of CD4+ T cells is an entity. Properdin Deficiency, Type II is an entity. CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, X-LINKED RECESSIVE, 5 is an entity. OPHTHALMOPLEGIA, EXTERNAL, AND MYOPIA (disorder) is an entity. 
Decreased cervical spine flexion due to contractures of posterior cervical muscles is an entity. Calf muscle pseudohypertrophy is an entity. AUTISM, SEVERE is an entity. Paroxysmal bursts of laughter is an entity. Deep philtrum is an entity. Long neck is an entity. Short distal phalanges is an entity. Spongiform cardiomyopathy is an entity. SPERMATOGENIC FAILURE, X-LINKED, 2 is an entity. Low Molecular Weight Proteinuria with Hypercalciuria and Nephrocalcinosis is an entity. 
Mild prenatal growth deficiency is an entity. Anteverted nostril is an entity. Limited interphalangeal movement is an entity. Ureteral anomalies is an entity. FETAL HEMOGLOBIN QUANTITATIVE TRAIT LOCUS 1 is an entity. Pseudoepiphyses is an entity. Short first metatarsal is an entity. GLOMUVENOUS MALFORMATIONS is an entity. MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, LIMB-GIRDLE, TYPE 1F is an entity. Prolonged Electroretinal Response Suppression is an entity. 
AUTOIMMUNE DISEASE, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 2 is an entity. BRANCHIOOTIC SYNDROME 3 (disorder) is an entity. Retinitis Pigmentosa 26 is an entity. Centrally nucleated skeletal muscle fibers is an entity. VENOOCCLUSIVE DISEASE AFTER BONE MARROW TRANSPLANTATION, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO is an entity. DEAFNESS, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 38 is an entity. Neutrophil Immunodeficiency Syndrome is an entity. Insulin-dependent but ketosis-resistant diabetes is an entity. Temporal epilepsy, familial is an entity. AMYOTROPHIC LATERAL SCLEROSIS 6 (disorder) is an entity. 
Hypoplasia of the brainstem is an entity. Cardiac conduction abnormalities is an entity. CONGENITAL DISORDER OF GLYCOSYLATION, TYPE Ii is an entity. Chromosome 1p36 Deletion Syndrome is an entity. Short fifth finger is an entity. Deafness, Autosomal Dominant 48 is an entity. NEUROTICISM is an entity. HYPOTRICHOSIS-LYMPHEDEMA-TELANGIECTASIA SYNDROME is an entity. Hypercholanemia, Familial is an entity. HIGH DENSITY LIPOPROTEIN CHOLESTEROL LEVEL QUANTITATIVE TRAIT LOCUS 3 is an entity. 
EPILEPSY, CHILDHOOD ABSENCE, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 2 is an entity. Tubulointerstitial nephritis and uveitis is an entity. Palmoplantar keratosis with erythema and scale is an entity. Diffuse, symmetrical osteosclerosis is an entity. BRAIN SMALL VESSEL DISEASE WITH HEMORRHAGE is an entity. Nocturnal hypoventilation is an entity. LONG QT SYNDROME 1, ACQUIRED, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO is an entity. TOENAIL DYSTROPHY, ISOLATED is an entity. CARDIOMYOPATHY, DILATED, 1M is an entity. Bothnia Retinal Dystrophy is an entity. 
Absence of bactericidal oxidative 'respiratory burst' in phagocytes is an entity. Antegonial notching of mandible is an entity. Partial fusion of carpals is an entity. Hypoplastic finger is an entity. Fleshy earlobes is an entity. Periorbital wrinkles is an entity. Hypoplastic-absent sebaceous glands is an entity. Hypoplastic-absent eccrine sweat glands is an entity. DEAFNESS-HYPOGONADISM SYNDROME is an entity. Rudimentary fibula is an entity. 
Second finger clinodactyly is an entity. Widely spaced teeth is an entity. 'Drumstick' terminal phalanges is an entity. Punctate calcifications of tarsals is an entity. Broad fingers is an entity. Narrow cervical spinal canal is an entity. Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita, distal, X-linked is an entity. AMELOGENESIS IMPERFECTA, HYPOPLASTIC/HYPOMATURATION, X-LINKED 2 is an entity. Exaggerated median tongue furrow is an entity. FG SYNDROME 5 (disorder) is an entity. 
Glycogen Storage Disease, Type IXD is an entity. Renal phosphate wasting is an entity. Premature Ovarian Failure 2a is an entity. FG SYNDROME 4 (disorder) is an entity. Dyserythropoietic Anemia with Thrombocytopenia is an entity. Goiter, Multinodular 2 is an entity. Autistic features is an entity. TESTICULAR GERM CELL TUMOR 1 is an entity. Hodgkin disease, X-linked pseudoautosomal is an entity. Lissencephaly, X-Linked, 2 is an entity. 
Renal salt wasting is an entity. ODONTOID HYPOPLASIA is an entity. Multicentric femoral head ossification is an entity. Absent metacarpal(s) is an entity. CONE-ROD DYSTROPHY 10 is an entity. SYSTEMIC LUPUS ERYTHEMATOSUS WITH HEMOLYTIC ANEMIA, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 1 is an entity. Anauxetic dysplasia is an entity. Aortic Aneurysm, Familial Thoracic 2 is an entity. ALBINISM, OCULOCUTANEOUS, TYPE IB (disorder) is an entity. POLYMICROGYRIA, BILATERAL FRONTOPARIETAL is an entity. 
Peripheral Arterial Occlusive Disease 1 is an entity. Van der Woude syndrome 2 is an entity. SPECIFIC LANGUAGE IMPAIRMENT 2 is an entity. CARDIOMYOPATHY, DILATED, 1L is an entity. Cerebellar cyst is an entity. POLYSUBSTANCE ABUSE, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO is an entity. Episodic Ataxia, Type 3 is an entity. Onion bulb formation is an entity. Hypotonia-Cystinuria Syndrome is an entity. Disproportionately long ulnae is an entity. 
COGNITIVE FUNCTION 1, SOCIAL is an entity. Female external genitalia in males is an entity. Dent disease 1 is an entity. C1-C2 subluxation is an entity. Pontocerebellar Hypoplasia Type 2A is an entity. Ataxia with vitamin E deficiency is an entity. Subperiosteal erosions due to secondary hyperparathyroidism is an entity. Methylmalonic Aciduria, CblD Type, Variant 2 is an entity. Large, floppy ears is an entity. Aplastic pubic bones is an entity. 
OVARIAN RESPONSE TO FSH STIMULATION is an entity. Increased anterioposterior diameter of chest is an entity. Thyroid defect in oxidation and organification of iodide is an entity. Bilateral absence of radius is an entity. THREONINEMIA is an entity. Diaphragmatic defect is an entity. Tay-Sachs Disease, Variant B1 is an entity. Hexosaminidase alpha-Subunit Deficiency (Variant B) is an entity. Infantile onset is an entity. Decreased urinary sulfate is an entity. 
Short upper lip is an entity. Loss of ability to walk is an entity. SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 5A, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE (disorder) is an entity. Spastic diplegia infantile type is an entity. Decreased sensory nerve conduction velocities (NCV) is an entity. Swan neck-like deformities of the fingers is an entity. Spastic Ataxia is an entity. Reduced B cell function is an entity. Precociously ossified carpal bones is an entity. Hypoplastic/aplastic pubic bones is an entity. 
Robinow syndrome, autosomal recessive is an entity. Abnormal aryepiglottic folds is an entity. Absent earlobe is an entity. Increased serum pyruvate is an entity. LYMPHANGIECTASIA, PULMONARY, CONGENITAL is an entity. Absence of labia majora is an entity. Peroxisomal ACYL-COA oxidase deficiency is an entity. Midgut malrotation is an entity. Kowarski syndrome is an entity. Achromatopsia 3 is an entity. 
Short limb dwarfism, disproportionate is an entity. Absence of visual evoked potentials is an entity. Kaler Garrity Stern syndrome is an entity. OSTEOGENESIS IMPERFECTA, TYPE IX (disorder) is an entity. Progressive microcephaly is an entity. Horizontal sacrum is an entity. Nakajo syndrome is an entity. Native American myopathy is an entity. Encephalopathy, recurrent is an entity. Muscle fiber necrosis is an entity. 
Anterior basal encephalocele is an entity. Median cleft palate is an entity. Ectopia lentis isolated is an entity. Peripheral nerve compression is an entity. Protuberances at ends of long bones is an entity. Cerebellar calcifications is an entity. Overgrowth of external genitalia is an entity. Pancreatic hyperplasia is an entity. Narrow maxilla is an entity. ECTRODACTYLY, ECTODERMAL DYSPLASIA, AND CLEFT LIP/PALATE SYNDROME 1 is an entity. 
EARLOBE CREASE is an entity. Dorsal subluxation of ulna is an entity. Reticulate pigmentation (oral mucosa) is an entity. Periapical radiolucencies is an entity. Nonarteritic anterior ischemic optic neuropathy (NAION) is an entity. Darier Disease, Segmental is an entity. Cataract, Variable Zonular Pulverulent is an entity. CATARACT, COPPOCK-LIKE is an entity. Hypoplastic male genitalia is an entity. SPINOCEREBELLAR ATAXIA, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 8 (disorder) is an entity. 
JOUBERT SYNDROME 6 is an entity. Multiple fractures present at birth is an entity. SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 31, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT is an entity. DEAFNESS, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 65 is an entity. HIGH DENSITY LIPOPROTEIN CHOLESTEROL LEVEL QUANTITATIVE TRAIT LOCUS 4 is an entity. Hyperostosis-hyperphosphatemia syndrome is an entity. HYPOPHOSPHATEMIC RICKETS WITH HYPERCALCIURIA, HEREDITARY is an entity. Erythrocytosis, Familial, 3 is an entity. Increased red blood cell mass is an entity. PARKINSON DISEASE 7, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE EARLY-ONSET is an entity. 
DEAFNESS, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 24 (disorder) is an entity. Bushy eyebrows is an entity. Neuroferritinopathy is an entity. Fryns-Aftimos Syndrome is an entity. HEREDITARY MOTOR AND SENSORY NEUROPATHY, TYPE IIC (disorder) is an entity. Long eyelashes is an entity. SPINOCEREBELLAR ATAXIA, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 1 is an entity. Pontocerebellar atrophy is an entity. CITRULLINEMIA, TYPE II, NEONATAL-ONSET is an entity. DERMATITIS, ATOPIC, 4 is an entity. 
Dermatitis, Atopic, 3 is an entity. Microphthalmia, Isolated, with Coloboma 2 is an entity. OTOSCLEROSIS 2 is an entity. AMYOTROPHIC LATERAL SCLEROSIS, TYPICAL is an entity. Thyroid Carcinoma, Papillary, With Papillary Renal Neoplasia is an entity. Short nose is an entity. BLEPHAROPHIMOSIS, PTOSIS, AND EPICANTHUS INVERSUS, TYPE II WITH DUANE RETRACTION SYNDROME is an entity. LEBER CONGENITAL AMAUROSIS 6 (disorder) is an entity. DEAFNESS, NONSYNDROMIC, MODIFIER 1 (disorder) is an entity. Epilepsy, Nocturnal Frontal Lobe, Type 3 is an entity. 
Decreased vibration sense at ankles is an entity. NEMALINE MYOPATHY 5 is an entity. MACROCEPHALY/AUTISM SYNDROME is an entity. OPTIC ATROPHY 4 (disorder) is an entity. Neuropathy, hereditary motor and sensory, Russe type is an entity. TUBEROUS SCLEROSIS 1 (disorder) is an entity. Metacarpal osteolysis is an entity. Limb fasciculations is an entity. LETHAL CONGENITAL CONTRACTURE SYNDROME 1 is an entity. Uncontrolled eye movements is an entity. 
Pointed proximal metacarpals is an entity. Pointed proximal second through fifth metacarpals is an entity. Dense calvaria is an entity. Molybdenum Cofactor Deficiency, Complementation Group B is an entity. Low B cell count is an entity. Methylmalonic aciduria is an entity. Methylcobalamin Deficiency, CblG Type is an entity. Small genitalia is an entity. Bowing of the long bones is an entity. Contiguous gene syndrome is an entity. 
Enlarged metaphyses is an entity. Jerky head movements is an entity. Keutel syndrome is an entity. Costal cartilage calcification is an entity. Calvarial osteosclerosis is an entity. Corneal abnormalities is an entity. Jejunal Atresia with Microcephaly and Ocular Anomalies is an entity. Low posterior hairline is an entity. Abnormality of T cells is an entity. Skin dimple over apex of long bone angulation is an entity. 
Broad first metatarsal is an entity. Hyperphosphatasia with Mental Retardation is an entity. Abnormal cortical gyration is an entity. Fleshy upturned lobules is an entity. 46,XY Gonadal Dysgenesis, Complete or Partial, DHH-Related is an entity. Gamma-Glutamylcysteine Synthetase Deficiency, Hemolytic Anemia due to is an entity. Late-onset spinocerebellar degeneration is an entity. Follicle-stimulating hormone deficiency, isolated is an entity. Deformed tarsal bones is an entity. Widely patent coronal suture is an entity. 
Hypoplastic fingernails is an entity. Sloping shoulders is an entity. Hyperextensible hand joints is an entity. Limited elbow flexion is an entity. Palmar hyperhidrosis is an entity. Cone-shaped epiphyses of phalanges 2 to 5 is an entity. Recurrent mandibular subluxations is an entity. DISORGANIZATION, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF is an entity. Rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata, type 2 is an entity. 2,4-Dienoyl-CoA Reductase Deficiency is an entity. 
Decreased palmar creases is an entity. Low-set, posteriorly rotated ears is an entity. Achromatopsia 2 is an entity. COLLAGENOSIS, FAMILIAL REACTIVE PERFORATING is an entity. Severe postnatal growth retardation is an entity. Precociously senile appearance is an entity. Aplastic clavicles is an entity. Combined Oxidative Phosphorylation Deficiency 4 is an entity. Lip telangiectases is an entity. Increased cellular sensitivity to UV light is an entity. 
MORM syndrome is an entity. DEAFNESS, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 49 is an entity. Macular Degeneration, Age-Related, 7 is an entity. Heart-hand syndrome, Slovenian type is an entity. SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 29, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT is an entity. Brooke-Spiegler syndrome is an entity. Deep plantar creases is an entity. WOLFRAM SYNDROME 2 is an entity. Periorbital fullness is an entity. Retinal Dystrophy, Early Onset Severe is an entity. 
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 12, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT (disorder) is an entity. Microcephaly, Primary Autosomal Recessive, 3 is an entity. ICHTHYOSIS, LAMELLAR, 3 is an entity. Charcot-Marie-Tooth Neuropathy, Type 4B2, with Early-Onset Glaucoma is an entity. Arrhythmogenic Right Ventricular Dysplasia, Familial, 6 is an entity. Leber Congenital Amaurosis 4 is an entity. NEPHRONOPHTHISIS 3 is an entity. Absence of Stensen duct is an entity. HEMOSIDEROSIS, SYSTEMIC, DUE TO ACERULOPLASMINEMIA is an entity. Renal bicarbonate wasting is an entity. 
Short Stature, Idiopathic, Autosomal is an entity. Facial paresis, hereditary, congenital is an entity. Poikiloderma with Neutropenia is an entity. Defective lymphocyte apoptosis is an entity. Chronic noninfectious lymphadenopathy is an entity. Increased proportion of HLA DR+ and CD57+ T cells is an entity. Absent/hypoplastic nails is an entity. Prominent interphalangeal joints is an entity. Recurrent pulmonary infections is an entity. Anterior rib punctate calcifications is an entity. 
Stippled epiphyses is an entity. Prolonged neonatal jaundice is an entity. Elevated long chain fatty acids is an entity. Fused sternal ossification centers is an entity. Femoral bowing is an entity. Large basal ganglia is an entity. Abnormal finger flexion creases is an entity. 3-methylcrotonyl CoA carboxylase 2 deficiency is an entity. Bardet-Biedl syndrome 3 is an entity. BARDET-BIEDL SYNDROME 8 is an entity. 
ATRICHIA WITH PAPULAR LESIONS is an entity. Asthma, Nasal Polyps, And Aspirin Intolerance is an entity. CAMPTODACTYLY-ARTHROPATHY-COXA VARA-PERICARDITIS SYNDROME is an entity. ARTHROGRYPOSIS MULTIPLEX CONGENITA, NEUROGENIC TYPE (disorder) is an entity. Arthrogryposis renal dysfunction cholestasis syndrome is an entity. AMYOTROPHIC LATERAL SCLEROSIS 2, JUVENILE (disorder) is an entity. LEBER CONGENITAL AMAUROSIS, TYPE II (disorder) is an entity. Progressive macrocephaly is an entity. Cloverleaf skull is an entity. Exercise-induced myoglobinuria in adults is an entity. 
Decreased testosterone in males is an entity. Frequent Candida infections is an entity. Aplasia/Hypoplasia of metatarsal bones is an entity. Absent vertebral body mineralization is an entity. Malrotation of small bowel is an entity. Snowflake vitreoretinal degeneration is an entity. Sternal anomalies is an entity. Shallow acetabulum is an entity. Triosephosphate Isomerase Deficiency is an entity. Preauricular skin tag is an entity. 
Tibia, Hypoplasia of, with Polydactyly is an entity. THYROID HORMONE PLASMA MEMBRANE TRANSPORT DEFECT is an entity. Hypoplastic ilia is an entity. Progressive fusion 2nd-5th PIP joints is an entity. Synostosis, Carpal, with Dysplastic Elbow Joints and Brachydactyly is an entity. Short philtrum is an entity. Progressive conductive deafness is an entity. Spinal canal stenosis is an entity. Y-shaped metacarpals is an entity. Syndactyly, Type I is an entity. 
SYMPHALANGISM, PROXIMAL is an entity. Stiff Skin Syndrome is an entity. Delayed mineralization of pubic bone is an entity. Cirrhosis, Familial is an entity. Hepatic vascular malformations is an entity. CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 3 (disorder) is an entity. Underdeveloped supraorbital ridges is an entity. Multiple palmar creases is an entity. BRACHYMETATARSUS IV is an entity. BRACHYDACTYLY, TYPE B1 is an entity. 
BRACHYDACTYLY, TYPE A1 (disorder) is an entity. Proportionate shortening of all digits is an entity. Cervical spine segmentation defects is an entity. Townes-Brocks-Branchiootorenal-Like Syndrome is an entity. Metatarsal synostosis is an entity. SEVERE ACUTE RESPIRATORY SYNDROME, PROGRESSION OF is an entity. IgA NEPHROPATHY, PROGRESSION TO RENAL FAILURE IN, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO is an entity. ANEURYSM, INTRACRANIAL BERRY, 1 (disorder) is an entity. Calvarial hyperostosis is an entity. Cartilaginous trachea is an entity. 
Broad distal hallux is an entity. Anomalous tracheal cartilage is an entity. Microcephaly with Simplified Gyral Pattern is an entity. Hereditary Myopathy with Early Respiratory Failure is an entity. Cone-Rod Dystrophy 7 is an entity. Xanthinuria, Type II is an entity. Spastic paraplegia 8, autosomal dominant is an entity. Spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia with multiple dislocations is an entity. Enlarged Vestibular Aqueduct is an entity. Peroxisome Biogenesis Disorder, Complementation Group D is an entity. 
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IB is an entity. MECKEL SYNDROME, TYPE 2 is an entity. Elevated serum transaminases during infections is an entity. ENDPLATE ACETYLCHOLINESTERASE DEFICIENCY (disorder) is an entity. Long hallux is an entity. Retinitis Pigmentosa 25 is an entity. Mental Retardation, Severe, With Spasticity And Pigmentary Tapetoretinal Degeneration is an entity. HYPOMYELINATION AND CONGENITAL CATARACT is an entity. Neuronal Ceroid Lipofuscinosis, Congenital is an entity. Microphthalmia, Syndromic 5 is an entity. 
Microphthalmia, Isolated, with Coloboma 3 is an entity. HYPERPARATHYROIDISM 3 is an entity. Corneal Dystrophy, Congenital Stromal is an entity. RETINAL CONE DYSTROPHY 4 is an entity. Pigmented Nodular Adrenocortical Disease, Primary, 2 is an entity. Increased vertebral height is an entity. MUTAGEN SENSITIVITY is an entity. 2-Methylbutyryl-CoA Dehydrogenase Deficiency is an entity. ASTHMA-RELATED TRAITS, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 3 is an entity. Fibromatosis, gingival, 3 is an entity. 
DEAFNESS, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 55 is an entity. Major Affective Disorder 3 is an entity. Severe combined immunodeficiency with sensitivity to ionizing radiation is an entity. Thick alveolar ridges is an entity. Fifth finger camptodactyly is an entity. Long tract signs is an entity. Proximal muscle weakness in lower limbs is an entity. Cataract, Zonular Pulverulent 3 is an entity. Wide anterior fontanel is an entity. VACUOLAR NEUROMYOPATHY (disorder) is an entity. 
Phosphoglycerate Dehydrogenase Deficiency is an entity. Tractional retinal detachment is an entity. EHLERS-DANLOS SYNDROME, MUSCULOCONTRACTURAL TYPE 1 is an entity. Peroxisome Biogenesis Disorder, Complementation Group 3 is an entity. Hyperprostaglandinuria is an entity. Low-to-normal blood pressure is an entity. PARAGANGLIOMAS 2 (disorder) is an entity. IRIDOGONIODYSGENESIS, TYPE 1 (disorder) is an entity. Congenital stapes ankylosis is an entity. ELLIPTOCYTOSIS 3 is an entity. 
Highly variable severity is an entity. Decreased to absent deep tendon reflexes is an entity. SCLERODERMA, FAMILIAL PROGRESSIVE is an entity. Restricted neck movement due to contractures is an entity. Systemic granulomatous disease is an entity. Retinomas (translucent, grayish retinal mass protruding into the vitreous) is an entity. RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 9 is an entity. PTOSIS, HEREDITARY CONGENITAL 1 (disorder) is an entity. Pterygium Of Conjunctiva And Cornea is an entity. Multiple pterygia is an entity. 
Short-limb dwarfism identifiable during childhood is an entity. Hypertrophy of skin of soles is an entity. Coronary artery disease, premature is an entity. Preaxial deficiency, postaxial polydactyly and hypospadias is an entity. Increased incidence of hepatocellular carcinoma is an entity. Orofaciodigital syndrome 5 is an entity. PNEUMOTHORAX, PRIMARY SPONTANEOUS is an entity. 6-Phosphogluconolactonase Deficiency is an entity. Pemphigus vulgaris, familial is an entity. Impotence due to autonomic dysfunction is an entity. 
Irregular, dense end plate is an entity. CHAR SYNDROME is an entity. Patella aplasia-hypoplasia is an entity. Paragangliomas with Sensorineural Hearing Loss is an entity. MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO is an entity. Weill-Marchesani Syndrome, Autosomal Recessive is an entity. HYPOTHYROIDISM, CONGENITAL, DUE TO THYROID DYSGENESIS is an entity. Hereditary bundle branch system defect is an entity. Agyria is an entity. Hypertyrosinemia is an entity. 
Adult Type Granulosa Cell Tumor is an entity. Serum Alanine Aminotransferase Measurement is an entity. Glucocorticoid deficiency is an entity. Mineralocorticoid deficiency is an entity. Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) Syndrome is an entity. PTEN Hamartoma Tumor Syndrome is an entity. Seizure Adverse Event is an entity. Parvovirus B19 (disease) is an entity. Acute lyme disease is an entity. Latent autoimmune diabetes mellitus in adult is an entity. 
Vasculitic neuropathy is an entity. Retinoic acid - acute promyelocytic leukemia syndrome is an entity. Aromatase deficiency is an entity. Congenital vascular anomaly is an entity. Glaucoma Adverse Event is an entity. Anxiety Adverse Event is an entity. Encephalopathy Adverse Event is an entity. Nystagmus Adverse Event is an entity. Spinocerebellar Ataxia 10 is an entity. Atherothrombosis is an entity. 
Mental Retardation, X-Linked, Syndromic 13 is an entity. Mental Retardation, X-Linked 79 is an entity. MYOPATHY, CONGENITAL, WITH EXCESS OF MUSCLE SPINDLES is an entity. Febrile Convulsions, Familial, 9 is an entity. Epilepsy, Familial Temporal Lobe, 4 is an entity. Paradoxical increased cortisol secretion on dexamethasone suppression test is an entity. Cortical tubers is an entity. Premature Ovarian Failure 5 is an entity. Cataract, Congenital Nuclear, Autosomal Recessive 3 is an entity. Hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis is an entity. 
Depletion of components of the alternative complement pathway is an entity. Decreased serum complement factor H is an entity. MALARIA, CEREBRAL, RESISTANCE TO is an entity. NEUROFIBROMATOSIS, TYPE 1-LIKE SYNDROME is an entity. MUNGAN SYNDROME is an entity. Limb contractures is an entity. PARKINSON DISEASE 6, LATE-ONSET, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO is an entity. Cleft Palate, Isolated, And Mental Retardation is an entity. PLASMODIUM VIVAX, RESISTANCE TO is an entity. MENTAL RETARDATION, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 7 is an entity. 
Spinal Muscular Atrophy, Distal, Autosomal Recessive, 4 is an entity. AUTISM, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 9 is an entity. Renal Tubular Acidosis, Proximal, With Ocular Abnormalities And Mental Retardation is an entity. Branchiootorenal Syndrome 2 is an entity. Vesicoureteral Reflux 2 is an entity. Peripheral sensory axonal neuropathy is an entity. Hypertensive left ventricular hypertrophy is an entity. Low grade glioma is an entity. Cicatrix is an entity. Vaginal Melanoma is an entity. 
orthopedic disorders is an entity. sparse facial hair is an entity. Indolent multiple myeloma is an entity. Pectus excavatum is an entity. Influenza due to Influenza A virus subtype H1N1 is an entity. Autoimmune Primary Adrenal Insufficiency is an entity. Premature contractions is an entity. Recurrent streptococcus pneumoniae infections is an entity. Retroperitoneal Leiomyosarcoma is an entity. DEAFNESS, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 74 is an entity. 
Infection of bone is an entity. Bulimia Nervosa is an entity. Neonatal Hypotonia is an entity. Familial Atypical Mole Melanoma Syndrome is an entity. Oral allergy syndrome is an entity. Destructive Arthritis is an entity. Triple-Negative Breast Carcinoma is an entity. Anal intraepithelial neoplasia I and II (AIN I and II) (histologically confirmed) is an entity. Vitamin D-resistant rickets is an entity. T-Cell Prolymphocytic Leukemia is an entity. 
HIV-1 infection is an entity. Angiocentric glioma is an entity. Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura, acquired is an entity. Homozygous protein C deficiency is an entity. Hereditary Renal Cell Carcinoma is an entity. EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA, JUNCTIONAL, LOCALISATA VARIANT (disorder) is an entity. HANGOVER, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO (finding) is an entity. Autoimmune pancreatitis is an entity. Aortic Aneurysm, Familial Thoracic 6 is an entity. BRAIN TUMOR-POLYPOSIS SYNDROME 2 (disorder) is an entity. 
EPILEPSY, PROGRESSIVE MYOCLONIC 3 is an entity. Hypophosphatasia, Perinatal Lethal is an entity. SKIN/HAIR/EYE PIGMENTATION, VARIATION IN, 5 (disorder) is an entity. Epidermolysis Bullosa Dystrophica Inversa, Autosomal Recessive is an entity. Combined Saposin Deficiency is an entity. Curly eyelashes is an entity. Inflammatory Bowel Disease 11 is an entity. Achondroplasia, Severe, With Developmental Delay And Acanthosis Nigricans is an entity. Thrombophilia, Hereditary, Due To Protein C Deficiency, Autosomal Dominant is an entity. Osteolysis, Hereditary, Of Carpal Bones With Or Without Nephropathy is an entity. 
Mullerian Aplasia and Hyperandrogenism is an entity. Narrow palpebral fissure is an entity. MICROCEPHALY, PRIMARY AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE, 7 (disorder) is an entity. DEAFNESS, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 59 (disorder) is an entity. Inflammatory Bowel Disease 26 is an entity. Chromosome 22q11.2 Microduplication Syndrome is an entity. Aneurysm, Intracranial Berry, 9 is an entity. Giant cell hepatitis shown on biopsy is an entity. Dyschromatosis Universalis Hereditaria 1 is an entity. Deafness, Congenital, and Onychodystrophy, Autosomal Dominant is an entity. 
CRANIODIAPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT (disorder) is an entity. Pyloric Stenosis, Infantile Hypertrophic, 5 is an entity. DIABETES MELLITUS, INSULIN-DEPENDENT, 22 (disorder) is an entity. DIABETES MELLITUS, INSULIN-DEPENDENT, 21 (disorder) is an entity. CONGESTIVE HEART FAILURE AND BETA-BLOCKER RESPONSE, MODIFIER OF is an entity. PITUITARY ADENOMA, FAMILIAL ISOLATED (disorder) is an entity. Skeletal Defects, Genital Hypoplasia, And Mental Retardation is an entity. Complement Component 6 Deficiency is an entity. Leukodystrophy, Hypomyelinating, 6 is an entity. Pontocerebellar Hypoplasia Type 2C is an entity. 
Post-angioplasty coronary artery restenosis is an entity. SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 38, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT (disorder) is an entity. Chromosome 2q32-Q33 Deletion Syndrome is an entity. Inflammatory Bowel Disease 20 is an entity. MICROVASCULAR COMPLICATIONS OF DIABETES, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 1(finding) is an entity. Portal fibrosis shown on biopsy is an entity. Ciliary Dyskinesia, Primary, 8 is an entity. EPILEPSY, CHILDHOOD ABSENCE, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 5 is an entity. Skin-Hair-Eye Pigmentation, Variation In, 10 is an entity. Inflammatory Bowel Disease 12 is an entity. 
MATURITY-ONSET DIABETES OF THE YOUNG, TYPE 9 (disorder) is an entity. Epidermolysis Bullosa Simplex With Pyloric Atresia is an entity. OTOSCLEROSIS 8 (disorder) is an entity. Hypophosphatemic Rickets And Hyperparathyroidism is an entity. Hypouricemia, Renal, 2 is an entity. AMYOTROPHIC LATERAL SCLEROSIS 10 (disorder) is an entity. Cataract, Juvenile, With Microcornea And Glucosuria is an entity. Thrombocytopenia 4 is an entity. Prostate Cancer, Hereditary, 14 is an entity. Mental Retardation And Microcephaly With Pontine And Cerebellar Hypoplasia is an entity. 
Myofibrillar Myopathy is an entity. SPHEROCYTOSIS, TYPE 3 (disorder) is an entity. Hyperdiploid B Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia is an entity. Merkel Cell Polyomavirus Infection is an entity. Splenic Diffuse Red Pulp Small B-Cell Lymphoma is an entity. Dedifferentiated Solitary Fibrous Tumor is an entity. Syndactyly, type 2 is an entity. MAJOR AFFECTIVE DISORDER 8 is an entity. Arylsulfatase A Deficiency is an entity. Polyposis, Adenomatous Intestinal is an entity. 
Saccular Aneurysm is an entity. Androgen Receptor Deficiency is an entity. Drug-Induced Liver Injury, Chronic is an entity. Kashin-Beck Disease is an entity. DEAFNESS, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 77 (disorder) is an entity. Hypoinsulinaemia (disorder) is an entity. Corneal Dystrophy, Subepithelial Mucinous is an entity. DEAFNESS, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 71 (disorder) is an entity. Thrombophilia, X-Linked, Due To Factor Ix Defect is an entity. Corneal Dystrophy, Lisch Epithelial is an entity. 
Vater Association With Macrocephaly And Ventriculomegaly is an entity. Hypokalemic Periodic Paralysis, Type 2 is an entity. Roifman-Chitayat Syndrome is an entity. Lipodystrophy, Congenital Generalized, Type 4 is an entity. Deafness, Autosomal Recessive 79 is an entity. Karak Syndrome is an entity. Progeria Syndrome, Childhood-Onset is an entity. Oculootodental Syndrome is an entity. Omodysplasia 2 is an entity. CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 15 is an entity. 
Cardiomyopathy, Familial Hypertrophic, 14 is an entity. Cardiomyopathy, Familial Hypertrophic, 13 is an entity. THYROTOXIC PERIODIC PARALYSIS, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 2 is an entity. Myopathy, Actin, Congenital, With Cores is an entity. Abnormal liver function tests during pregnancy, resolves postpartum is an entity. DIARRHEA 5, WITH TUFTING ENTEROPATHY, CONGENITAL is an entity. SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 44, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE (disorder) is an entity. MENTAL RETARDATION, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 13 is an entity. Chromosome 5p13 Duplication Syndrome is an entity. Dystransthyretinemic Euthyroidal Hyperthyroxinemia is an entity. 
INFLAMMATORY BOWEL DISEASE 28, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE is an entity. Brugada Syndrome 7 is an entity. Macrothrombocytopenia, Autosomal Dominant, Tubb1-Related is an entity. Achromatopsia 5 is an entity. Hyperuricemic Nephropathy, Familial Juvenile 2 is an entity. Glaucoma 3, Primary Congenital, D is an entity. Nijmegen Breakage Syndrome-Like Disorder is an entity. Metaphyseal Anadysplasia 2 is an entity. NEURODEGENERATION WITH BRAIN IRON ACCUMULATION 1, ATYPICAL is an entity. Pituitary Hormone Deficiency, Combined, 1 is an entity. 
GLIOMA SUSCEPTIBILITY 2 is an entity. Biliary Cirrhosis, Primary, 2 is an entity. Emery-Dreifuss Muscular Dystrophy 4 is an entity. Multiple Synostoses Syndrome 3 is an entity. Myopathy, Myofibrillar, Bag3-Related is an entity. Prenatal onset is an entity. MENOPAUSE, NATURAL, AGE AT, QUANTITATIVE TRAIT LOCUS 3 is an entity. ALPHA-KETOGLUTARATE DEHYDROGENASE DEFICIENCY is an entity. Refractory cytopenia of childhood is an entity. Myeloid and Lymphoid Neoplasms with FGFR1 Rearrangement is an entity. 
Chemical Gastritis is an entity. Lymphoblastic B-cell lymphoma is an entity. Weight Gain Adverse Event is an entity. Infection of amniotic sac and membranes is an entity. Pleomorphic lobular carcinoma in situ is an entity. Recurrent pregnancy loss is an entity. Visuospatial deficit is an entity. Sex Differentiation Disorders is an entity. Familial antiphospholipid syndrome is an entity. Sudden unexpected nocturnal death syndrome is an entity. 
Chronic malaria is an entity. Primary cortisol resistance is an entity. Cerebellar degeneration, subacute is an entity. Benign essential blepharospasm is an entity. Reginato Schiapachasse syndrome is an entity. Interferon gamma, receptor 1, deficiency is an entity. Acroosteolysis dominant type is an entity. Marie Unna congenital hypotrichosis is an entity. Cholestasis, progressive familial intrahepatic 4 is an entity. Megalocytic interstitial nephritis is an entity. 
Idiopathic dilation cardiomyopathy is an entity. Prinzmetal's variant angina is an entity. Usher syndrome, type 1F is an entity. Alport syndrome, dominant type is an entity. Yusho Disease is an entity. Spastic paraplegia 3, autosomal dominant is an entity. Mixed sclerosing bone dystrophy is an entity. Plasmacytoma anaplastic is an entity. Deafness, autosomal dominant nonsyndromic sensorineural 17 is an entity. Epidermolytic palmoplantar keratoderma Vorner type is an entity. 
Acquired angioedema is an entity. Congenital defect of skull and scalp is an entity. Nasopharyngeal carcinoma is an entity. Hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia, familial, 1 is an entity. Familial HDL deficiency is an entity. Aspartylglucosamidase (AGA) deficiency is an entity. Albinism with hemorrhagic diathesis and pigmented reticuloendothelial cells is an entity. Reticuloendotheliosis, familial, with eosinophilia is an entity. Pfeiffer type acrocephalosyndactyly is an entity. 22q11 Deletion Syndrome is an entity. 
Neointima is an entity. Acquired Hypogammaglobulinemia is an entity. SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 37, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT (disorder) is an entity. Constitutional obesity is an entity. Amyloid of cornea is an entity. Right ventricular failure is an entity. Chronic mucus hypersecretion is an entity. Leukocytoclastic vasculitis is an entity. Papillary glioneuronal tumor is an entity. Rhabdoid Tumor Predisposition Syndrome is an entity. 
Cervical Intraepithelial Neoplasia Grade 2/3 is an entity. Inherited Bone Marrow Failure Syndrome is an entity. Stage IV Colorectal Cancer AJCC v7 is an entity. Absent abdominal musculature is an entity. MITOCHONDRIAL DNA DEPLETION SYNDROME 2 (MYOPATHIC TYPE) is an entity. Coloboma, Ocular, And Ichthyosis, Brain Malformations, And Endocrine Abnormalities is an entity. Fetal overgrowth is an entity. HYPERHOMOCYSTEINEMIA, THROMBOTIC, CBS-RELATED is an entity. Ventral septal defect (VSD) is an entity. MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY-DYSTROGLYCANOPATHY (LIMB-GIRDLE), TYPE C, 2 is an entity. 
PANCREATIC CANCER, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 3 is an entity. AUTISM, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 16 is an entity. OGUCHI DISEASE 2 is an entity. RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 51 is an entity. Antibody Deficiency due to Defect in CD19 is an entity. SODIUM SERUM LEVEL QUANTITATIVE TRAIT LOCUS 1 is an entity. MACROSTOMIA, ISOLATED is an entity. FETAL HEMOGLOBIN QUANTITATIVE TRAIT LOCUS 6 is an entity. SENIOR-LOKEN SYNDROME 7 is an entity. CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, RECESSIVE INTERMEDIATE B is an entity. 
METHYLMALONIC ACIDURIA DUE TO TRANSCOBALAMIN RECEPTOR DEFECT is an entity. C1q DEFICIENCY is an entity. D-2-HYDROXYGLUTARIC ACIDURIA 2 is an entity. Steep acetabular roof is an entity. SPONDYLOCOSTAL DYSOSTOSIS 4, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE is an entity. Hypermethioninemia with Deficiency of S-Adenosylhomocysteine Hydrolase is an entity. RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 49 is an entity. RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 47 is an entity. COMPLEMENT COMPONENT 8 DEFICIENCY, TYPE II is an entity. Retinitis Pigmentosa 20 is an entity. 
ADENOMA, CORTISOL-PRODUCING is an entity. IMMUNODEFICIENCY DUE TO FICOLIN 3 DEFICIENCY is an entity. RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 38 (disorder) is an entity. MYOPATHY, MYOFIBRILLAR, FATAL INFANTILE HYPERTONIC, ALPHA-B CRYSTALLIN-RELATED is an entity. Hirschsprung Disease, Cardiac Defects, and Autonomic Dysfunction is an entity. HYPOMAGNESEMIA 6, RENAL is an entity. CANDIDIASIS, FAMILIAL, 6 is an entity. MENTAL RETARDATION, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 6 is an entity. MELANOMA, CUTANEOUS MALIGNANT, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 6 is an entity. CYANOSIS, TRANSIENT NEONATAL is an entity. 
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 60 is an entity. AMYLOIDOSIS, LEPTOMENINGEAL, TRANSTHYRETIN-RELATED is an entity. Hypoplastic heart is an entity. Abnormal iron deposition in mitochondria is an entity. ROBINOW SYNDROME, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE, WITH APLASIA/HYPOPLASIA OF PHALANGES AND METACARPALS/METATARSALS is an entity. CORNEAL OPACIFICATION WITH OTHER OCULAR ANOMALIES is an entity. Pulmonary function (finding) is an entity. Cannabis use is an entity. Papillary Meningioma is an entity. Endocervical adenocarcinoma in situ is an entity. 
High density lipoprotein deficiency is an entity. Stroke, Lacunar is an entity. Disseminated Fusariosis is an entity. GALNS Deficiency is an entity. Erythema Multiforme Major is an entity. Solar Erythema is an entity. Colon Serrated Polyposis is an entity. Colorectal Mucosa-Associated Lymphoid Tissue Lymphoma is an entity. Surfactant Protein C Deficiency is an entity. AMYOTROPHIC LATERAL SCLEROSIS 15, WITH OR WITHOUT FRONTOTEMPORAL DEMENTIA is an entity. 
Abnormal iris vasculature is an entity. PARAGANGLIOMAS 1 WITH SENSORINEURAL HEARING LOSS is an entity. Decreased activity of mitochondrial respiratory complexes is an entity. Congenital Bilateral Cataracts is an entity. BARRETT ESOPHAGUS/ESOPHAGEAL ADENOCARCINOMA is an entity. VITILIGO-ASSOCIATED MULTIPLE AUTOIMMUNE DISEASE SUSCEPTIBILITY 6 is an entity. NAIL DISORDER, NONSYNDROMIC CONGENITAL, 4 is an entity. Thymic hypoplasia or aplasia is an entity. GLUTARIC ACIDEMIA IIB is an entity. Leukodystrophy, dysmyelinating is an entity. 
Orotic acid crystalluria is an entity. LIVER FAILURE, INFANTILE, TRANSIENT is an entity. Thumb aplasia is an entity. Pigment gallstones is an entity. Abdominal muscular hypoplasia is an entity. Spontaneous abortion, recurrent is an entity. HEMOGLOBIN H DISEASE, NONDELETIONAL is an entity. N-ACETYLASPARTATE DEFICIENCY is an entity. COMBINED OXIDATIVE PHOSPHORYLATION DEFICIENCY 8 is an entity. Pyruvate Dehydrogenase E1-Beta Deficiency is an entity. 
MOSAIC VARIEGATED ANEUPLOIDY SYNDROME 2 is an entity. CORTICAL MALFORMATIONS, OCCIPITAL is an entity. NAIL DISORDER, NONSYNDROMIC CONGENITAL, 10 is an entity. GELEOPHYSIC DYSPLASIA 2 is an entity. MECKEL SYNDROME, TYPE 9 is an entity. WARBURG MICRO SYNDROME 3 is an entity. MENTAL RETARDATION, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 8 is an entity. Platelet-Activating Factor Acetylhydrolase Deficiency is an entity. MULTIPLE MITOCHONDRIAL DYSFUNCTIONS SYNDROME 2 WITH HYPERGLYCINEMIA is an entity. SCLEROSTEOSIS 2 is an entity. 
PERIPHERAL NEUROPATHY, MYOPATHY, HOARSENESS, AND HEARING LOSS is an entity. COMPLEMENT COMPONENT 4B DEFICIENCY is an entity. MYOPATHY, AREFLEXIA, RESPIRATORY DISTRESS, AND DYSPHAGIA, EARLY-ONSET is an entity. GLUCOCORTICOID THERAPY, RESPONSE TO is an entity. SYSTEMIC LUPUS ERYTHEMATOSUS 16 is an entity. VENTRICULAR SEPTAL DEFECT 3 is an entity. ICHTHYOSIS, SPASTIC QUADRIPLEGIA, AND MENTAL RETARDATION is an entity. THIAMINE METABOLISM DYSFUNCTION SYNDROME 5 (EPISODIC ENCEPHALOPATHY TYPE) is an entity. JOUBERT SYNDROME 12/15, DIGENIC is an entity. CONE-ROD DYSTROPHY 16 is an entity. 
USHER SYNDROME, TYPE IIIB is an entity. CONGENITAL DISORDER OF GLYCOSYLATION, TYPE Ir is an entity. Stuttering, Familial Persistent 1 is an entity. Factor VIII Deficiency is an entity. Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy syndrome, type 1 is an entity. Anorectal Malformations is an entity. Mental Retardation, X-Linked Nonsyndromic is an entity. Mitochondrial cardiomyopathy is an entity. Norovirus Infections is an entity. Chronic myelopathy is an entity. 
Familial Hypophosphatemic Rickets is an entity. SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 53, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE is an entity. Progressive cGVHD is an entity. Triple Negative Breast Neoplasms is an entity. MYOCLONUS, FAMILIAL CORTICAL is an entity. Neonatal Drug Withdrawal is an entity. Soluble Transferrin Receptor Measurement is an entity. HYPOGONADOTROPIC HYPOGONADISM 13 WITH OR WITHOUT ANOSMIA is an entity. SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 49, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE is an entity. CILIARY DYSKINESIA, PRIMARY, 18 is an entity. 
Urgency frequency syndrome is an entity. Breast cancer, lobular is an entity. NEURODEGENERATION WITH BRAIN IRON ACCUMULATION 5 is an entity. HYPOGONADOTROPHIC HYPOGONADISM 5 WITHOUT ANOSMIA is an entity. HYPOGONADOTROPIC HYPOGONADISM 4 WITH OR WITHOUT ANOSMIA is an entity. Metaphyseal sclerosis is an entity. HYPOGONADOTROPIC HYPOGONADISM 6 WITH OR WITHOUT ANOSMIA is an entity. Photoparoxysmal response on EEG is an entity. MENTAL RETARDATION, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 14 is an entity. JOUBERT SYNDROME 17 is an entity. 
UV-SENSITIVE SYNDROME 2 is an entity. MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY-DYSTROGLYCANOPATHY (CONGENITAL WITH BRAIN AND EYE ANOMALIES), TYPE A, 7 is an entity. COENZYME Q10 DEFICIENCY, PRIMARY, 6 is an entity. MICROCEPHALY 8, PRIMARY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE is an entity. COMBINED OXIDATIVE PHOSPHORYLATION DEFICIENCY 10 is an entity. HYPERPHOSPHATASIA WITH MENTAL RETARDATION SYNDROME 2 is an entity. NEURONOPATHY, DISTAL HEREDITARY MOTOR, TYPE VB is an entity. HETEROTAXY, VISCERAL, 6, AUTOSOMAL is an entity. Absent toes is an entity. INTERSTITIAL NEPHRITIS, KARYOMEGALIC is an entity. 
EPILEPSY, IDIOPATHIC GENERALIZED, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 12 is an entity. PEROXISOME BIOGENESIS DISORDER 11B is an entity. HYPOGONADOTROPIC HYPOGONADISM 16 WITH OR WITHOUT ANOSMIA is an entity. LETHAL CONGENITAL CONTRACTURE SYNDROME 4 is an entity. ECTODERMAL DYSPLASIA 9, HAIR/NAIL TYPE is an entity. PONTOCEREBELLAR HYPOPLASIA, TYPE 8 is an entity. CARPENTER SYNDROME 2 is an entity. PHOSPHOHYDROXYLYSINURIA is an entity. ICHTHYOSIS, CONGENITAL, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 9 is an entity. ICHTHYOSIS, CONGENITAL, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 10 is an entity. 
DYSTONIA 24 is an entity. ARTHROGRYPOSIS, DISTAL, TYPE 5D is an entity. SPERMATOGENIC FAILURE 11 is an entity. C3HEX, ABILITY TO SMELL is an entity. MICROCEPHALY 10, PRIMARY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE is an entity. RETINAL DYSTROPHY, IRIS COLOBOMA, AND COMEDOGENIC ACNE SYNDROME is an entity. MITOCHONDRIAL COMPLEX III DEFICIENCY, NUCLEAR TYPE 4 is an entity. CARDIOMYOPATHY, DILATED, 1II is an entity. HYDROCEPHALUS, NONSYNDROMIC, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 2 is an entity. High Grade Astrocytic Tumor is an entity. 
Hypertriglyceridemic Waist is an entity. Stevens-Johnson Syndrome Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis Spectrum is an entity. Congenital Intestinal Aganglionosis is an entity. Allergic sensitization is an entity. Intracranial glioma is an entity. 11-Beta-hydroxylase deficiency is an entity. Sodium concentration in urine above normal is an entity. Giant Cell Fibroblastoma is an entity. CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, TYPE 4B3 is an entity. Chronic kidney disease due to hypertension is an entity. 
Proliferative verrucous oral leukoplakia is an entity. Telangiectatic focal nodular hyperplasia is an entity. Pulmonary arterial hypertension associated with connective tissue disease is an entity. Inherited aminoaciduria is an entity. Isodicentric Chromosome 15 Syndrome is an entity. Intranuclear Rod Myopathy is an entity. Early-Onset Glaucoma is an entity. X-Linked Csnb is an entity. Infection is an entity. Follicular Variant Thyroid Gland Papillary Carcinoma is an entity. 
RETINOSCHISIS 1, X-LINKED, JUVENILE is an entity. Drug-induced tardive dyskinesia is an entity. MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY-DYSTROGLYCANOPATHY (LIMB-GIRDLE), TYPE C, 14 is an entity. MYOPATHY DUE TO MYOADENYLATE DEAMINASE DEFICIENCY is an entity. BODY MASS INDEX QUANTITATIVE TRAIT LOCUS 18 is an entity. RENAL-HEPATIC-PANCREATIC DYSPLASIA 1 is an entity. Extrahepatic Cholangiocarcinoma is an entity. CATARACT 20, MULTIPLE TYPES is an entity. Medial rotation of the medial malleolus is an entity. PRECOCIOUS PUBERTY, CENTRAL, 1 is an entity. 
BARDET-BIEDL SYNDROME 18 is an entity. Spotty hypopigmentation is an entity. Decreased sensitivity to hypoxemia is an entity. Numerous congenital melanocytic nevi is an entity. Puffy cheeks is an entity. Increased urinary taurine is an entity. disproportionate shortening of the tibia is an entity. Loss of definition of corticomedullary differentiation is an entity. CAP MYOPATHY 2 is an entity. Breathing dysregulation is an entity. 
Optic disc abnormalities is an entity. Acetabular spurs is an entity. CHROMOSOME 17p13.3, CENTROMERIC, DUPLICATION SYNDROME is an entity. BONE MARROW FAILURE SYNDROME 1 is an entity. HEMOLYTIC UREMIC SYNDROME, ATYPICAL, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 7 is an entity. EPISODIC PAIN SYNDROME, FAMILIAL, 1 is an entity. OSTEOGENESIS IMPERFECTA, TYPE XV is an entity. POLYDACTYLY, POSTAXIAL, TYPE A6 is an entity. MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY-DYSTROGLYCANOPATHY (CONGENITAL WITH BRAIN AND EYE ANOMALIES), TYPE A, 12 is an entity. HYPOGONADOTROPIC HYPOGONADISM 17 WITH OR WITHOUT ANOSMIA is an entity. 
HYPOGONADOTROPIC HYPOGONADISM 20 WITH OR WITHOUT ANOSMIA is an entity. CONGENITAL DISORDER OF DEGLYCOSYLATION is an entity. HYPOMYELINATION WITH BRAINSTEM AND SPINAL CORD INVOLVEMENT AND LEG SPASTICITY is an entity. CILIARY DYSKINESIA, PRIMARY, 21 is an entity. PERRAULT SYNDROME 4 is an entity. PRECOCIOUS PUBERTY, CENTRAL, 2 is an entity. MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY-DYSTROGLYCANOPATHY (CONGENITAL WITH BRAIN AND EYE ANOMALIES), TYPE A, 14 is an entity. NOONAN SYNDROME 8 is an entity. HYPOCALCEMIA, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 2 is an entity. ATRIAL FIBRILLATION, FAMILIAL, 14 is an entity. 
SPERMATOGENIC FAILURE 12 is an entity. MICROCEPHALY 11, PRIMARY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE is an entity. MYOPIA 23, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE is an entity. AORTIC ANEURYSM, FAMILIAL THORACIC 8 is an entity. CILIARY DYSKINESIA, PRIMARY, 22 is an entity. CILIARY DYSKINESIA, PRIMARY, 24 is an entity. MENTAL RETARDATION, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 21 is an entity. ALACRIMA, ACHALASIA, AND MENTAL RETARDATION SYNDROME is an entity. NEPHROTIC SYNDROME, TYPE 9 is an entity. Bilateral coxa valga is an entity. 
MACULAR DEGENERATION, AGE-RELATED, 15 is an entity. IMMUNODEFICIENCY 15 is an entity. IMMUNODEFICIENCY 16 is an entity. COMBINED OXIDATIVE PHOSPHORYLATION DEFICIENCY 19 is an entity. CONGENITAL DISORDER OF GLYCOSYLATION, TYPE Iw is an entity. CONGENITAL DISORDER OF GLYCOSYLATION, TYPE Ix is an entity. MEMORY QUANTITATIVE TRAIT LOCUS is an entity. L-FERRITIN DEFICIENCY is an entity. IMMUNODEFICIENCY 19 is an entity. DOWLING-DEGOS DISEASE 4 is an entity. 
AURICULOCONDYLAR SYNDROME 3 is an entity. SACRAL AGENESIS WITH VERTEBRAL ANOMALIES is an entity. NEMALINE MYOPATHY 9 is an entity. Intercrural pterygium is an entity. Loneliness in adolescence is an entity. Tuberculosis in children is an entity. Cardiac arrest in children is an entity. Neural Glioblastoma is an entity. Disseminated Bacillus Calmette-Guerin infection is an entity. Clinical Chorioamnionitis is an entity. 
BASAL CELL CARCINOMA, SOMATIC is an entity. Compensated liver disease is an entity. Complex craniosynostosis is an entity. Aspirin exacerbated respiratory disease is an entity. Acute vascular graft rejection is an entity. Langerhans cell histiocytosis of skin is an entity. Nodular thyroid disease is an entity. Anterior pituitary hormone deficiency is an entity. Chromophobe carcinoma is an entity. Skin Erosion is an entity. 
CONE DYSTROPHY 5, X-LINKED is an entity. MENTAL RETARDATION, X-LINKED 49 is an entity. THYROTROPIN-RELEASING HORMONE DEFICIENCY is an entity. PULMONARY HYPERTENSION, PRIMARY, 2 is an entity. DEAFNESS, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 45 is an entity. Nephrogenic Systemic Fibrosis is an entity. DEAFNESS, Y-LINKED 1 is an entity. ICHTHYOSIS, CONGENITAL, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 2 is an entity. CATARACT 21, MULTIPLE TYPES is an entity. Question mark ear is an entity. 
HIGH DENSITY LIPOPROTEIN CHOLESTEROL LEVEL QUANTITATIVE TRAIT LOCUS 7 is an entity. SPRINTING PERFORMANCE is an entity. ACTN3 DEFICIENCY is an entity. AICARDI-GOUTIERES SYNDROME 7 is an entity. DEAFNESS, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 83 is an entity. PEROXISOME BIOGENESIS DISORDER 7A (ZELLWEGER) is an entity. MENTAL RETARDATION, X-LINKED 101 is an entity. NEPHRONOPHTHISIS 18 is an entity. Autoinflammatory Syndrome is an entity. PEELING SKIN SYNDROME 1 is an entity. 
SARDINIAN HPFH PHENOTYPE is an entity. Ovarian Hyperandrogenism is an entity. Loeys-Dietz Syndrome Type 2 is an entity. Intestinal Type Sinonasal Adenocarcinoma is an entity. Familial Testicular Germ Cell Tumor is an entity. Early Inflammatory Arthritis is an entity. 45,X/46,XY Mixed Gonadal Dysgenesis is an entity. DESBUQUOIS DYSPLASIA 1 is an entity. Bronchial carcinoid is an entity. Hypoplastic tragus is an entity. 
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 69 is an entity. MENTAL RETARDATION, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 42 is an entity. PONTOCEREBELLAR HYPOPLASIA, TYPE 10 is an entity. MELANOMA, CUTANEOUS MALIGNANT, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 10 is an entity. NEPHROTIC SYNDROME, TYPE 10 is an entity. DIARRHEA 7 is an entity. EPILEPTIC ENCEPHALOPATHY, EARLY INFANTILE, 24 is an entity. BLEEDING DISORDER, PLATELET-TYPE, 18 is an entity. HYPOTRICHOSIS 13 is an entity. Abnormal mitochondria morphology is an entity. 
COMBINED OXIDATIVE PHOSPHORYLATION DEFICIENCY 21 is an entity. EPIPHYSEAL CHONDRODYSPLASIA, MIURA TYPE is an entity. STING-ASSOCIATED VASCULOPATHY, INFANTILE-ONSET is an entity. MEGALENCEPHALY-POLYMICROGYRIA-POLYDACTYLY-HYDROCEPHALUS SYNDROME 2 is an entity. MENTAL RETARDATION, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 44 is an entity. MYOPIA 24, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT is an entity. OROFACIODIGITAL SYNDROME XIV is an entity. VESICOURETERAL REFLUX 8 is an entity. HENNEKAM LYMPHANGIECTASIA-LYMPHEDEMA SYNDROME 2 is an entity. CATARACTS, GROWTH HORMONE DEFICIENCY, SENSORY NEUROPATHY, SENSORINEURAL HEARING LOSS, AND SKELETAL DYSPLASIA is an entity. 
FANCONI RENOTUBULAR SYNDROME 4 WITH MATURITY-ONSET DIABETES OF THE YOUNG is an entity. DEAFNESS, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 103 is an entity. MENTAL RETARDATION, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 29 is an entity. RETINAL DYSTROPHY WITH INNER RETINAL DYSFUNCTION AND GANGLION CELL ABNORMALITIES is an entity. PALMOPLANTAR KERATODERMA AND WOOLLY HAIR is an entity. NEMALINE MYOPATHY 10 is an entity. AORTIC ANEURYSM, FAMILIAL THORACIC 9 is an entity. RETINAL DYSTROPHY AND OBESITY is an entity. POLYGLUCOSAN BODY MYOPATHY 2 is an entity. RUIJS-AALFS SYNDROME is an entity. 
Thoracic kyphoscoliosis is an entity. EPILEPTIC ENCEPHALOPATHY, EARLY INFANTILE, 28 is an entity. FOCAL SEGMENTAL GLOMERULOSCLEROSIS 9 is an entity. CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, AXONAL, TYPE 2T is an entity. COMBINED OXIDATIVE PHOSPHORYLATION DEFICIENCY 24 is an entity. DIABETES INSIPIDUS, NEPHROGENIC, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE is an entity. RHD, WEAK D, TYPE I is an entity. BONE MINERAL DENSITY VARIATION QUANTITATIVE TRAIT LOCUS is an entity. DEAFNESS, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT NONSYNDROMIC SENSORINEURAL 39, WITH DENTINOGENESIS IMPERFECTA 1 is an entity. MARFAN SYNDROME, MILD VARIABLE is an entity. 
MARFAN SYNDROME, ATYPICAL is an entity. MARFAN SYNDROME, MILD is an entity. FIBRINOGEN MILANO XII, DIGENIC PHENOTYPE is an entity. DIABETES MELLITUS, NONINSULIN-DEPENDENT, LATE-ONSET is an entity. PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IA, WITH TESTOTOXICOSIS is an entity. ALPHA-THALASSEMIA-2, NONDELETIONAL is an entity. INFLAMMATORY BOWEL DISEASE 28 is an entity. GLIOBLASTOMA MULTIFORME, SOMATIC is an entity. POSTAXIAL POLYDACTYLY, TYPE A1/B is an entity. GREIG CEPHALOPOLYSYNDACTYLY SYNDROME, SEVERE is an entity. 
HEMOLYTIC ANEMIA, NONSPHEROCYTIC, AND NEUROLOGIC DEFICITS, DUE TO GLUCOSE PHOSPHATE ISOMERASE DEFICIENCY is an entity. MYOKYMIA 1 WITH HYPOMAGNESEMIA is an entity. GILBERT SYNDROME, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO is an entity. DIABETES INSIPIDUS, NEUROHYPOPHYSEAL, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE is an entity. MAPLE SYRUP URINE DISEASE, THIAMINE-RESPONSIVE, TYPE II is an entity. PARKINSONISM/MELAS OVERLAP SYNDROME is an entity. MYOPATHY, MITOCHONDRIAL, WITH DIABETES MELLITUS is an entity. ATAXIA, PROGRESSIVE SEIZURES, MENTAL DETERIORATION, AND HEARING LOSS is an entity. CLEIDOCRANIAL DYSPLASIA, SEVERE, WITH OSTEOPOROSIS AND SCOLIOSIS is an entity. MONOCARBOXYLATE TRANSPORTER 1 DEFICIENCY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE is an entity. 
MONOCARBOXYLATE TRANSPORTER 1 DEFICIENCY, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT is an entity. SCHWANNOMATOSIS 1, SOMATIC is an entity. HYPOGONADOTROPIC HYPOGONADISM 20 WITHOUT ANOSMIA is an entity. FOCAL SEGMENTAL GLOMERULOSCLEROSIS 3 is an entity. OBESITY, MILD, EARLY-ONSET is an entity. DYSTONIA 1, TORSION, LATE-ONSET is an entity. BARDET-BIEDL SYNDROME 1/2, DIGENIC is an entity. CEROID LIPOFUSCINOSIS, NEURONAL, 3, PROTRACTED is an entity. CYSTIC PARATHYROID ADENOMA, SOMATIC is an entity. LONG QT SYNDROME 1, RECESSIVE is an entity. 
ARYLSULFATASE A PSEUDODEFICIENCY is an entity. TRICHOTHIODYSTROPHY 3, PHOTOSENSITIVE is an entity. MUCOPOLYSACCHARIDOSIS, TYPE VI, INTERMEDIATE is an entity. ANGIOFIBROMA, SOMATIC is an entity. BETA-KNOSSOS-THALASSEMIA is an entity. BETA-THALASSEMIA, LERMONTOV TYPE is an entity. FOVEAL HYPOPLASIA 1 WITH OR WITHOUT ANTERIOR SEGMENT ANOMALIES is an entity. Abnormality of peripheral nerve conduction is an entity. Intestinal hypoperistalsis is an entity. Penile melanosis is an entity. 
Mitochondrial abnormalities is an entity. Elevated urinary vanillylmandelic acid is an entity. Respiratory complex deficiency, ATPase deficiency is an entity. Respiratory complex III deficiency is an entity. Familial primary hyperaldosteronism type 2 is an entity. maternal hyperglycemia is an entity. Subcoronal hypospadias is an entity. Medullary sponge kidney disease is an entity. Abnormal type II collagen is an entity. Abnormal hyaline collagen is an entity. 
Neonatal hemolytic anemia is an entity. Generalized trichodysplasia is an entity. Equinovalgus deformity is an entity. Persistant truncus arteriosus is an entity. Abnormality of the backbone is an entity. Submucous clefting is an entity. Displacement of the external urethral meatus is an entity. Abnormal vertebral ossification is an entity. Abnormal localization of kidney is an entity. Enlarged cochlear aqueduct is an entity. 
Chromosomal breakage induced by ionizing radiation is an entity. Abnormality of thalamus morphology is an entity. Duplicated thumbs is an entity. Enlarged epiphysis of the proximal phalanx of the 3rd finger is an entity. Immunoglobulin IgG2 deficiency is an entity. Neutrophil inclusion bodies is an entity. Elevated follicle stimulating hormone is an entity. Retinitis pigmentosa inversa is an entity. Posterior Y-sutural cataract is an entity. Punctate opacification of the cornea is an entity. 
Patchy hypo- and hyperpigmentation is an entity. Decreased number of sweat glands is an entity. Reduced number of intrahepatic bile ducts is an entity. Mesoaxial hand polydactyly is an entity. Lethal skeletal dysplasia is an entity. Facial telangiectasia in butterfly midface distribution is an entity. Hypoplasia of the nasal bone is an entity. Radial metaphyseal irregularity is an entity. Abnormality of the musculature is an entity. Cystic angiomatosis of bone is an entity. 
Abnormality of the cerebrum is an entity. Abnormality of metabolism/homeostasis is an entity. Short distal phalanx of toe is an entity. Bifid distal phalanx of toe is an entity. Abnormality of the liver is an entity. Abnormality of the adrenal glands is an entity. Abnormality of the nasal bridge is an entity. Abnormality of the ovary is an entity. Ambiguous genitalia, male is an entity. Abnormal cartilage collagen is an entity. 
Short corpus callosum is an entity. Peripheral arteriovenous fistula is an entity. Abnormal eating behavior is an entity. Abnormality of the thoracic spine is an entity. Abnormality of the cerebral vasculature is an entity. Calcification of cartilage is an entity. Mucosal telangiectasiae is an entity. Upper limb asymmetry is an entity. Lipomas of the central neryous system is an entity. Overfriendliness is an entity. 
Defective T cell proliferation is an entity. Peripheral amyelination is an entity. Profound hearing impairment is an entity. Abnormal urine potassium concentration is an entity. Slender proximal phalanx of finger is an entity. Hypothalamic luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone deficiency is an entity. Digital flexor tenosynovitis is an entity. Absent inner and outer dynein arms is an entity. Reduced sperm motility is an entity. Abnormal natural killer cell physiology is an entity. 
Abnormal mitochondrial shape is an entity. Increased urinary disaccharide excretion is an entity. Ectopic ossification in muscle tissue is an entity. Elevated luteinizing hormone is an entity. Obstructive azoospermia is an entity. Decreased urinary urate is an entity. Mesenteric artery aneurysm is an entity. Reduced factor IX activity is an entity. Dichromacy is an entity. Abnormality of corneal stroma is an entity. 
Abnormality of corneal endothelium is an entity. Generalized hypopigmentation of hair is an entity. Regional abnormality of skin is an entity. Long-segment aganglionic megacolon is an entity. Absent tragus is an entity. EEG with continuous slow activity is an entity. Spontaneous rupture of the globe is an entity. Cystic lesions of the pinnae is an entity. Aplasia/Hypoplasia of the thymus is an entity. Hypertrophy of the lower limb is an entity. 
Pseudoepiphyses of the proximal phalanges of the hand is an entity. Broad 1st metacarpal is an entity. Broad distal phalanges of all fingers is an entity. Lester's sign is an entity. Tibial pseudoarthrosis is an entity. Chronic CSF lymphocytosis is an entity. Abnormality of the hairline is an entity. Enlarged epiphysis of the middle phalanx of the 2nd finger is an entity. Radial deviation of the 4th finger is an entity. Aplasia/Hypoplasia involving the pelvis is an entity. 
Absent epiglottis is an entity. Enlarged polycystic ovaries is an entity. Congenital macroorchidism is an entity. Abnormality of the vertebral spinous processes is an entity. Hypoplastic spinal processes is an entity. Punctate vertebral calcifications is an entity. Hypoplastic fifth fingernail is an entity. Transient hypophosphatemia is an entity. Cerebellar cortical atrophy is an entity. Abnormality of the retinal vasculature is an entity. 
Intraretinal exudate is an entity. Amyloid deposition in the vitreous humor is an entity. Irido-fundal coloboma is an entity. Vitelliform-like macular lesions is an entity. Night blindness, progressive is an entity. Telangiectasia of extensor surfaces is an entity. Perifollicular hyperkeratosis is an entity. Generalized hyperpigmentation is an entity. Occipital myelomeningocele is an entity. Spinocerebellar tract disease in lower limbs is an entity. 
Cerebral artery atherosclerosis is an entity. Focal T2 hyperintense basal ganglia lesion is an entity. Anterior encephalocele is an entity. Grammar-specific speech disorder is an entity. Congenital neuroblastoma is an entity. Short chordae tendineae of the tricuspid valve is an entity. Reduced systolic function is an entity. Straight clavicles is an entity. Depletion of mitochondrial DNA in liver is an entity. Aplasia/hypoplasia of the humerus is an entity. 
Dumbbell-shaped femur is an entity. Screwdriver-shaped incisors is an entity. Abnormality of primary molar morphology is an entity. Supernumerary maxillary incisor is an entity. Slender metacarpals is an entity. Intermittent hyperpnea at rest is an entity. Joint swelling onset late infancy is an entity. Sclerotic cranial sutures is an entity. Severe T lymphocytopenia is an entity. Recurrent Haemophilus influenzae infections is an entity. 
Large vessel vasculitis is an entity. Generalized distal tubular acidosis is an entity. Reduced protein S activity is an entity. Microspherocytosis is an entity. Temporal hypotrichosis is an entity. Abnormality of the gastric mucosa is an entity. Irregular ossification of hand bones is an entity. Irregular carpal bones is an entity. Midline defect of the nose is an entity. Midline nasal groove is an entity. 
Abnormality of ulnar metaphysis is an entity. Abnormality of the joint spaces of the elbow is an entity. Type 1 and type 2 muscle fiber minicore regions is an entity. Episodic flaccid weakness is an entity. Genetic anticipation with paternal anticipation bias is an entity. Positive ferric chloride test is an entity. Elevated intracellular cystine is an entity. Elevated urinary norepinephrine is an entity. Decreased pyruvate carboxylase activity is an entity. Abnormality of cholesterol metabolism is an entity. 
Abnormality of the shoulder is an entity. Recurrent enteroviral infections is an entity. Abnormality of eosinophils is an entity. Acroosteolysis of distal phalanges (feet) is an entity. Autoamputation of foot is an entity. EEG with irregular generalized spike and wave complexes is an entity. High axial triradius is an entity. Abnormality of the metaphyses is an entity. Abnormality of the sclera is an entity. Abnormality of the conjunctiva is an entity. 
Increased adipose tissue around the neck is an entity. Nasal mucosa telangiectasia is an entity. Abnormality of cochlea is an entity. Abnormality of the forehead is an entity. Increased facial adipose tissue is an entity. Abnormality of the fontanelles or cranial sutures is an entity. Abnormality of the scrotum is an entity. Functional abnormality of male internal genitalia is an entity. Undifferentiated spondyloarthropathy is an entity. Lesion of fallopian tube is an entity. 
beta-Mannosidosis is an entity. Decreased antibody level in blood is an entity. Idiopathic retroperitoneal fibrosis is an entity. Night blindness, congenital stationary, complete is an entity. Opalescent dentin is an entity. CONE-ROD DYSTROPHY 21 is an entity. Ectomesenchymal Chondromyxoid Tumor is an entity. Rapid-Onset Obesity with Hypothalamic Dysfunction, Hypoventilation, and Autonomic Dysregulation is an entity. Secondary Hemophagocytic Lymphohistiocytosis is an entity. Ph-Like Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia is an entity. 
Hypocellular Myelodysplastic Syndrome is an entity. Familial Atypical Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome is an entity. Angiosarcoma of Soft Tissue is an entity. Adnexal Dysplasia is an entity. Wide skull shape is an entity. Missing sinuses is an entity. Hyperplasia of hypophysial fossa is an entity. Decreased circulating androgen level is an entity. Hyperphalangy of the 2nd finger is an entity. Optically empty vitreous is an entity. 
Decreased adiponectin level is an entity. Hyperkeratosis pilaris is an entity. Elevated plasma acylcarnitine levels is an entity. Partial duplication of thumb phalanx is an entity. Porencephaly is an entity. Oligodontia is an entity. PARKINSON DISEASE 11, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO is an entity. Basal cell carcinoma, nodular is an entity. MYOCLONIC-ATONIC EPILEPSY is an entity. AL-RAQAD SYNDROME is an entity. 
PROGRESSIVE EXTERNAL OPHTHALMOPLEGIA WITH MITOCHONDRIAL DNA DELETIONS, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 1 is an entity. NEPHROTIC SYNDROME, TYPE 13 is an entity. LEUKODYSTROPHY, HYPOMYELINATING, 13 is an entity. PARKINSON DISEASE 23, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE EARLY-ONSET is an entity. CONGENITAL DISORDER OF GLYCOSYLATION, TYPE IIp is an entity. LAMB-SHAFFER SYNDROME is an entity. NEPHROTIC SYNDROME, TYPE 11 is an entity. SEIZURES, SCOLIOSIS, AND MACROCEPHALY SYNDROME is an entity. CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, AXONAL, TYPE 2X is an entity. CUTIS LAXA, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 3 is an entity. 
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 9B, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE is an entity. AU-KLINE SYNDROME is an entity. SPONDYLOCOSTAL DYSOSTOSIS 6, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE is an entity. EXUDATIVE VITREORETINOPATHY 6 is an entity. SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 74, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE is an entity. MICROPHTHALMIA, ISOLATED, WITH COLOBOMA 10 is an entity. AUTOIMMUNE INTERSTITIAL LUNG, JOINT, AND KIDNEY DISEASE is an entity. DYSTONIA 27 is an entity. PALMOPLANTAR KERATODERMA, NONEPIDERMOLYTIC, FOCAL 2 is an entity. NIGHT BLINDNESS, CONGENITAL STATIONARY, TYPE 1G is an entity. 
MANDIBULOFACIAL DYSOSTOSIS WITH ALOPECIA is an entity. EPILEPTIC ENCEPHALOPATHY, EARLY INFANTILE, 29 is an entity. MYASTHENIC SYNDROME, CONGENITAL, 18 is an entity. MYASTHENIC SYNDROME, CONGENITAL, 9, ASSOCIATED WITH ACETYLCHOLINE RECEPTOR DEFICIENCY is an entity. SENIOR-LOKEN SYNDROME 8 is an entity. SINGLETON-MERTEN SYNDROME 2 is an entity. LETHAL CONGENITAL CONTRACTURE SYNDROME 8 is an entity. AMELOGENESIS IMPERFECTA, TYPE IF is an entity. CONGENITAL CONTRACTURES OF THE LIMBS AND FACE, HYPOTONIA, AND DEVELOPMENTAL DELAY is an entity. MENTAL RETARDATION, X-LINKED, SYNDROMIC 34 is an entity. 
INCONTINENTIA PIGMENTI, ATYPICAL is an entity. ULLRICH CONGENITAL MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY 1, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT is an entity. VATER/VACTERL ASSOCIATION is an entity. Multiple osteochondroma of long bone is an entity. Non-ST Elevated Myocardial Infarction is an entity. Periodic fever, aphthous stomatitis, pharyngitis, and adenopathy syndrome [PFAPA] is an entity. Autosomal dominant hyperinsulinism due to Kir6.2 deficiency is an entity. Spinocerebellar ataxia type 28 is an entity. Atypical Werner syndrome is an entity. Posterior cortical atrophy syndrome is an entity. 
Sudden sensorineural hearing loss is an entity. Underdevelopment of facial bones is an entity. Increased projection of maxilla is an entity. Lesion of oral cavity is an entity. Hypotrophic midface is an entity. Recurrent sinus disease is an entity. Pointed front tooth is an entity. Malformation of the temporomandibular joint is an entity. Smooth dorsum of tongue is an entity. Collapsed nostrils is an entity. 
Abnormal maturation of the pelvis bone is an entity. Small condylar neck of mandible is an entity. Small condylar head of mandible is an entity. Absence of the condylar head of mandible is an entity. Defective enamel matrix is an entity. Fluorosis of tooth enamel is an entity. Hypertrophy of the internal surface of the cranial bones is an entity. Curvature of outermost bone of little finger is an entity. Visible nasal septum is an entity. Hypotrophic nasal tip is an entity. 
Hypertrophy of nasal tip is an entity. Accelerated plaque build-up in arteries is an entity. Increased ossification of calvarial bones is an entity. Enlargement of the inner surface of the frontal bone is an entity. Thick skull bones is an entity. Enlargement of skull bones is an entity. Curvature of little finger is an entity. Flattening of facial bones is an entity. Increased thickness of cranium is an entity. Abnormality of skull shape is an entity. 
Communication delay is an entity. Uncoordinated limb movement is an entity. Agenesis of eyebrows is an entity. Small wings of the pelvic girdle is an entity. Angle class 3 malocclusion is an entity. Defective tooth enamel is an entity. Inadequate arch length for tooth size is an entity. Hypertrophy of permanent maxillary central incisor is an entity. Hyperplasia of supraorbital margins is an entity. Hypertrophy of lower jaw is an entity. 
Hyperplasia of cheeks is an entity. Prominent back of the head is an entity. Malformation of head shape is an entity. Abnormality of cranial vault shape is an entity. Increased size of cranium is an entity. Agenesis of parotid duct is an entity. Negative nitroblue tetrazolium reduction test is an entity. Calcium oxalate kidney stones is an entity. 