Western-blot, RT-PCR and cDNA sequencing analyses allowed us to identify two RHBDD2 alternatively spliced mRNA isoforms expressed in breast cancer cell lines.
Interestingly, siRNA-mediated silencing of RHBDD2 expression results in a decrease of MCF7 breast cancer cells proliferation compared with the corresponding controls (p=0.001).
In conclusion, our findings suggest that RHBDD2 over-expression behaves as an indicator of poor prognosis and may play a role facilitating breast cancer progression.
These effects could also be exerted via the upregulation of eight specific target genes, the subsequent over-activation of the PKC and PI3 K-Akt pathways, and the eventual abnormal cardiac development and VSD.
Reduced translation of CEBPA mRNA has been associated with increased proliferation of bronchial smooth muscle (BSM) cells of asthma patients.
HDM extract reduced the C/EBPAlfa expression in BSM cells of asthma patients, which coincided with significantly increased levels of calreticulin (CRT) protein, an inhibitor of CEBPA mRNA translation.
In conclusion, HDM extract reduced CEBPA mRNA translation, specifically in asthmatic BSM cells, and 1) upregulated CRT, 2) activated PAR2, and increased 3) IL-6 expression and 4) the proliferation of asthmatic BSM cells.
Airway smooth muscle cells from persons with asthma are deficient in C/EBP-alpha, which may explain the finding that CSs do not inhibit the proliferation of these cells in vitro.
CCAAT/enhancer-binding proteins (C/EBPs) control cell proliferation; lack of C/EBPalpha correlates with increased proliferation of bronchial smooth muscle cells (BSMCs) of asthmatic patients.
Expression and function of C/EBPalpha, beta, delta, and epsilon BSMCs of control subjects (n = 9), asthmatic patients (n = 12), and patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD; n = 10) were determined.
The asthmatic group did not appropriately express C/EBPalpha.
Protein analysis and electrophoretic mobility shift assay confirmed the disease-specific expression pattern of C/EBPalpha in asthmatic patients and C/EBPdelta in patients with COPD.
The reason for the differences which have been observed in the in vitro properties of airway smooth muscle derived from asthmatic individuals may result from an inherent "supercontractility", an increased tendency to proliferate due to the absence of an inhibitory transcription factor C/EBP-alpha, the influence of an altered extracellular matrix and/or a decrease in release of factors such as PGE(2) which would under normal circumstances inhibit both proliferation and contraction.
Hepatocellular carcinoma etiology had no detectable influence on miR-122 expression, whereas miR-152 was increased in HCV+ tissue samples.
Aberrant expressions of the miR-148/152 family (miR-148a, miR-148b, and miR-152) have been documented in many tumor tissues, including hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
And high expression of HLA-G further suppressed NK against cancer cells, providing a new concept that miR-152 was involved in HBV-induced hepatocellular carcinoma.
Further, FDA-approved arsenic trioxide (ATO) and the ND2-SmoA1 mouse model of Medulloblastoma (MB) were used to extend our analyses of combined MRI and Reverse Phase Protein Microarray (RPMA) data to assess tumor responses to ATO and to uncover the complexity of therapeutic molecular biology.
Importantly, while ASC deficiency did not affect normal cerebellar development, ASC knockout mice on the Smoothened (ND2:SmoA1) transgenic model of medulloblastoma exhibited a profound reduction in medulloblastoma incidence and a delayed tumor onset.
We report the use of IRDye 800CW chlorotoxin (CLTX) as a targeted imaging agent for brain tumors in a spontaneous mouse model of medulloblastoma, ND2:SmoA1.
Importantly, genetic deletion of Bax in medulloblastoma-prone ND2:SmoA1 transgenic mice greatly accelerated tumorigenesis.
Five common variants were associated with pancreatic cancer at nominal statistical significance (P &lt; 0.05) with the strongest finding for mt5460g in the ND2 gene [OR = 3.9; 95% confidence interval (CI), 1.5-10; P = 0.004] which encodes an A331T substitution.
Our findings indicate a critical role of HspBP1 in differential CHIP/Hsp70 activities in neuronal and glial cells and the greater neuronal vulnerability to misfolded proteins in neurodegenerative diseases.
In this study the adenoviral mediated over-expression of HSP70 interacting protein (HIP) alone was shown to significantly reduce inclusion formation in both an in vitro model of Spinal Bulbar Muscular Atrophy and a primary neuronal model of polyglutamine disease.
To explore the relationship of telomerase, MYC and JAK2 in chronic myeloproliferative diseases, we investigated hTERT and MYC expression in bone marrow cells of essential thrombocythemia (ET) and polycythemia vera (PV).
DCAF17 mutations are associated with Woodhouse-Sakati syndrome, a rare disorder characterized by alopecia, hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, sensorineural hearing loss, diabetes mellitus, and extrapyramidal movements.
Woodhouse-Sakati syndrome (WSS) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder characterized by alopecia, hypogonadism, diabetes mellitus, intellectual disability, sensorineural deafness, extrapyramidal signs, and low insulinlike growth factor 1 levels.
Woodhouse-Sakati syndrome consists of alopecia, hypogonadism, diabetes mellitus, mild mental retardation, sensorineural deafness and ECG abnormalities.
A population of CD80+Gr-1+ myeloid cells was found to be expanded in conventional as well as in bone marrow-transplanted mice with disseminated candidiasis, but its depletion increased the IFN-gamma-mediated antifungal resistance.
The patients with esophageal candidiasis had lower CD4+ cell counts (129/microliter) and CD4:CD8 ratios (0.23) than those with oropharyngeal candidiasis (CD4 179/microliter; CD4:CD8 0.35).
We served patients with cystic fibrosis (CF, n=29), cystic fibrosis related diabetes (CFRD, n=19) and healthy controls (n=18) a standardized breakfast (23 g protein, 25 g fat and 76 g carbohydrates) after an overnight fasting.
CNS anomalies included 12 Chiari malformations, 2 Dandy-Walker malformations (DWM), 1 variant of Dandy-Walker syndrome (DWS), 3 iniencephalies, 15 anencephalies, 1 alobar holoprosencephaly, 2 isolated hydrocephalies, 3 hydrocephalies with cerebellar hypoplasia, 1 occipital encephalocele, 1 lumbosacral myelomeningocele accompanied with microcephaly.
Acrania, alobar holoprosencephaly, cephaloceles, and spina bifida can confidently be diagnosed at that stage and should actively be looked for in every fetus undergoing first-trimester ultrasound.
We present a new case with 13q deletion syndrome phenotypically characterized by severe major malformations, some of them still undescribed, consisting of left diaphragmatic hernia, right pulmonary sequestration, hypoplastic left heart syndrome, pancreatic agenesis, polysplenia, and catastrophic central nervous system malformations: semilobar holoprosencephaly, occipital myelomeningocele, partial agenesis of the corpus callosum and agenesis of olfactory bulbs.
The early scan detected all cases of acrania, alobar holoprosencephaly, exomphalos, gastroschisis, megacystis and body stalk anomaly, 77% of absent hand or foot, 50% of diaphragmatic hernia, 50% of lethal skeletal dysplasias, 60% of polydactyly, 34% of major cardiac defects, 5% of facial clefts and 14% of open spina bifida, but none of agenesis of the corpus callosum, cerebellar or vermian hypoplasia, echogenic lung lesions, bowel obstruction, most renal defects or talipes.
The case presented is, to our knowledge, the first published report comprising a combination of a semilobar holoprosencephaly associated with a Chiari II malformation and a myelomeningocele diagnosed prenatally and confirmed by postmortem neuropathologic evaluation.
These findings indicate that in the case of pre- and postnatal detection of a myelomeningocele and/or Chiari II malformation, possible additional intracranial malformation, such as a semilobar holoprosencephaly, should also be taken into account and vice versa.
We report on a female still-birth with cebocephaly, alobar holoprosencephaly, cleft palate, lumbar spina bifida, sirenomelia, a single umbilical artery, and a 46,XX karyotype, but without maternal diabetes mellitus.
The current study provides novel evidence that TGFBeta upregulates the expression of multiple receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs), including IGF1R, EGFR, PDGFBetaR, and FGFR1 in human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells.
While numerical and functional defects of invariant NKT cells have been demonstrated in rheumatoid arthritis (RA), the detailed characterization of proliferative and secretory responses following CD1d-mediated presentation is lacking; the presence of non-invariant populations has never been assessed in human autoimmunity.
In adults, angiopoietin-2 (Ang-2) and its soluble receptor (sTie-2) are associated with diabetes, hypertension, and obesity and could be increased in children with OSA and obesity, particularly those with evidence of cardiometabolic alterations.
Children with obesity and OSA had significantly elevated plasma Ang-2 and sTie-2 levels compared to corresponding controls with and without obesity.
Ang-2 and sTie-2 plasma levels are increased in pediatric OSA and obesity, particularly when endothelial dysfunction or insulin resistance is detectable, and appear to decrease upon OSA treatment.
ANG-2 overexpressing mice show increased sWAT vascularization and are resistant to HFD-induced obesity.
We studied the effect of sleeve gastrectomy and the influence of FTO rs9930506 polymorphism on Tie-2, angiopoietin-1 and angiopoietin-2 expression in morbid obesity.
Those most at risk report a family history of at least one parent with a pre-existing G-alpha protein defect, including night blindness, pseudohypoparathyroidism or adenoma of the thyroid or pituitary gland.
We have previously shown that the ethanol extract of dried Angelica gigas Nakai (AGN) root exerts anticancer activity against androgen receptor (AR)-negative human DU145 and PC-3 prostate cancer xenografts and primary carcinogenesis in the transgenic adenocarcinoma of mouse prostate (TRAMP) model.
We showed previously that nuclear localization of the androgen receptor (AR) and expression of the androgen-responsive gene FK506-binding protein 5 (FKBP5) in esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC) tissues were associated with decreased patient survival, suggesting a role for androgens in this cancer.
Only 5 samples were ERG-/AR- corresponding to adenocarcinoma GS of 6.
AR was expressed by 54% (27/50) of ECA including 60% of low grade endometrioid carcinomas, 70% high grade endometrioid carcinomas, 70% serous carcinomas, 50% carcinosarcomas, and 20% clear cell carcinomas.
High AR expression was chiefly restricted to a subset of serous carcinomas (50%).
AR expression occurred most often in concert with ER staining, although 5 high grade cancers (1 serous carcinoma, 4 carcinosarcomas) showed AR expression in the absence of ER.
In summary, AR positivity is seen in over half of ECA in our study, including the majority of low grade endometrioid carcinomas, high grade endometrioid carcinomas, and serous carcinomas.
High level expression is seen in half of serous carcinomas and a subset of serous carcinomas and carcinosarcomas show some degree of AR staining in the absence of ER, suggesting a possible role for androgen inhibition in treatment of these cases.
IL-6 and the MSC markers CD166 and nestin were colocalized in macroscopically normal human cartilage taken from the lateral femoral compartment of knees with medial tibiofemoral osteoarthritis.
In conclusion, our findings support a model where Sirt3 plays a protective role against oxidative stress in oocytes exposed to maternal diabetes through deacetylating SOD2K68.
The aim of our study was to investigate the effects of LPL (rs320), LIPC (rs2070895), SCARB1 (rs5888), LCAT (rs2292318), CETP (rs708272), ADIPOQ (rs1501299), RETN (rs3745367), PON1 (rs662), and MNSOD (rs4880) gene polymorphisms on lipid metabolism and diabetic dyslipidemia.
Significant associations were observed between LPL (rs320) (p&lt;0.001), LIPC (rs2070895) (p&lt;0.001), SCARB1 (rs5888) (p&lt;0.001), LCAT (rs2292318) (p&lt;0.001), CETP (rs708272) (p&lt;0.001), ADIPOQ (rs1501299) (p=0.01), RETN (rs3745367) (p&lt;0.001), and MNSOD (rs4880) (p&lt;0.001) polymorphisms and diabetic dyslipidemia.
LPL (rs320), LIPC (rs2070895), SCARB1 (rs5888), LCAT (rs2292318), CETP (rs708272), ADIPOQ (rs1501299), RETN (rs3745367), and MNSOD (rs4880) polymorphisms play an important role in basic molecular metabolism in diabetic dyslipidemia.
We studied if YKL-40 is related to inflammation, fibrosis, and/or lung function in subjects exposed to asbestosis.
Plasma YKL-40 levels were significantly higher in subjects with asbestosis (n = 19) than in those with no fibrotic findings in HRCT following asbestos exposure (n = 66) or in unexposed healthy controls.
YKL-40 is a promising marker of cardiovascular disease and liver siderosis in Beta-TM patients.
The aim of the study was to analyse the level of serum YKL-40 and plasma chitotriosidase activity of patients with beta-thalassemia to assess whether their expression correlates with liver disease and degree of liver siderosis.
Our results demonstrated that (1) Invasive ductal carcinoma patients with low expression of Slit2 or Robo1 exhibited worse prognosis and brain-specific metastasis, but not liver, bone or lung.
Ten prognostic and diagnostic epigenetic breast cancer biomarkers (PITX2, RASSF1A, PLAU, LHX3, PITX3, LIMK1, SLITRK1, SLIT2, HS3ST2, and TFF1) were analyzed in tissue samples obtained from two patients with invasive ductal carcinoma of the breast.
The aim of this study is to determine the correlation between methylation status of multiple cancer genes, p16(INK4A), p14(ARF), Cyclin D2 and Slit2 in invasive ductal carcinoma of the breast and paired serum DNA and clinicopathological parameters.
To examine the role of IRS2 in allergic disease, we evaluated the responses of IRS2-deficient (IRS2(-/-)) mice.
Additional work further confirmed CDK6, RICTOR, and CTSB (cathepsin B) as targets of miR-218 and examined the functional role of one of these targets, CDK6, in medulloblastoma.
Overexpression of CDK6 is present in approximately one-third of medulloblastomas and is an independent poor prognostic marker for this disease.
MicroRNA (miR)-124 inhibits expression of CDK6 and prevents proliferation of glioblastoma and medulloblastoma cells in vitro.
We examined the effects of miR-124 overexpression on medulloblastoma cells both in vitro and in vivo and compared cell lines that have low and high CDK6 expression.
MiR-124 overexpression inhibits the proliferation of medulloblastoma cells, and this effect is mediated mostly through the action of miR-124 upon CDK6.
CDK6 is overexpressed in medulloblastoma patients and is associated with an adverse prognosis.
To investigate the role of CDK6 in medulloblastoma, we assayed the effect of CDK6 inhibition on proliferation by depleting expression with RNA interference (RNAi) or by inhibiting kinase function with a small molecule inhibitor, PD0332991.
Gene expression analysis revealed that CDK6 mRNA expression is higher than normal cerebellum in fifteen out of sixteen medulloblastoma patient samples.
Inhibition of CDK6 by RNAi significantly decreased medulloblastoma cell proliferation and colony forming potential.
Our findings suggest that targeting CDK6 with small molecule inhibitors may prove beneficial in the treatment of medulloblastoma, especially when combined with radiation.
In trichoblastic fibroma (three cases), CK1/5/10/14, CK7, CK8/18, CK10/11, CK14, CK17 and CK19 were expressed in the basaloid nests, and CK6 and involucrin were detected in the inner layers of keratinous cysts.
Since type 1 diabetes mellitus often begins in childhood, we used juvenile (4- to 5-wk-old) rats to demonstrate that a single bout of IIH (5 U/kg sc) reduced plasma glucose by 24% and peak epinephrine by 59% 1 day later.
Plasma membrane NADH oxidoreductase activity, studied using cytosolic NADH as substrate and assayed with DCIP as acceptor, was significantly increased in IDDM patients, suggesting a response to a deficient mitochondrial energetic activity.
Non insulin-dependent diabetic (NIDDM) mortality is 1.4 to 3.7 times that of non-diabetics.
In the COPD and asthma patients, the median urinary cotinine concentration was 167 ng/mL (range, 2-5,348 ng/mL) and 47 ng/mL (range, 5-2,735 ng/mL), respectively (p &lt; 0.0001), whereas the median eCO level was 8 ppm (range, 0-31 ppm) and 5 ppm (range, 2-45 ppm), respectively (p &lt; 0.05).
In 30 (29%) of the patients with asthma or COPD, the urinary cotinine concentration and the eCO level both belied the patient claims of not being current smokers.
We aimed to study eCO levels in asthmatics and detect the possible factors influencing them.
The differences in eCO levels among various asthmatic phenotypes and the correlations between eCO and other measured parameters (spirometric indices, Asthma Control Test score, exhaled nitric oxide, total IgE, blood eosinophils and marker of oxidative damage of proteins) were analysed.
Levels of eCO widely differed according to the selected characteristics of asthma.
Asthmatics showed higher eCO concentrations than controls (1.44 +/- 0.12 ppm vs. 0.91 +/- 0.11 ppm, p &lt; 0.001).
Acute exacerbation of asthma was accompanied by a significant increase in eCO compared to the clinically controlled stage (2.17 +/- 0.36 ppm vs. 1.33 +/- 0.13 ppm, p &lt; 0.001).
Atopic, non-atopic asthma and asthma associated with allergic rhinitis (AR) showed elevated levels of eCO.
The levels of eCO negatively correlated with the marker of protein oxidation in asthmatics, especially in atopic form and during acute exacerbation.
In a population of asthmatic children, eCO levels could be considered as a marker of both allergic inflammation and oxidative stress in the airways.
Concomitant AR and asthma control were the most important factors affecting the levels of eCO in asthmatic children.
eCO values have been evaluated as potential indicators of inflammation in asthma, stable COPD and exacerbations, cystic fibrosis, lung cancer, or during surgery or critical care.
Twenty-four non-smokers (10 male, 14 female, mean age 17.6 years) and 24 smokers (mean of 3.5 pack-years; 15 male, 9 female, mean age 17.8 years) were compared in terms of lung function, bronchial hyperreactivity (BHR), levels of exhaled carbon monoxide (eCO), exhaled nitric oxide (eNO), and blood counts.
The concentration of exhaled carbon monoxide (eCO) in young children with stable asthma and during acute asthma attack is not known.
In preschool-age children, eCO levels of those with asthma attacks (mean +/- SE, 2.7 +/- 0.3 p.p.m., n= 43) were significantly higher than those of subjects with asymptomatic asthma (0.5 +/- 0.1 p.p.m., P &lt; 0.05), URI (0.8 +/- 0.1 p.p.m., P &lt; 0.05) and healthy children (0.4 +/- 0.1 p.p.m., P &lt; 0.05).
A multivariate linear regression model showed that eCO was higher in children with asthma attacks independent of age and gender.
In 33 asthmatic children followed before and after treatment, eCO levels during asthma attacks significantly decreased after inhalation therapy with a combination of salbutamol and sodium cromoglycate (before therapy, 2.9 +/- 0.4 p.p.m.
The measurement of eCO using a novel collecting system is useful in the recognition of asthma in preschool children.
Elevations in E-CO have been observed in critically ill or post-surgical patients and those with various pulmonary diseases associated with inflammation, including chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), asthma, cystic fibrosis and infections.
The purpose of this meta-analysis is to determine whether eCO is elevated in asthmatics, is regulated by steroid treatment and reflects disease severity and control.
Observational studies comparing eCO in non-smoking asthmatics and healthy subjects or asthmatics before and after steroid treatment were included.
The eCO level was significantly higher in asthmatics as compared to healthy subjects and in intermittent asthma as compared to persistent asthma.
However, eCO could not distinguish between steroid-treated asthmatics and steroid-free patients nor separate controlled and partly-controlled asthma from uncontrolled asthma in cross-sectional studies.
eCO is elevated in asthmatics but levels only partially reflect disease severity and control.
eCO might be a potentially useful non-invasive biomarker of airway inflammation and oxidative stress in nonsmoking asthmatics.
However, recent studies revealed that genetic inhibition of SphK2 did not significantly impact the severity or progression of inflammatory arthritis, while pharmacologic inhibition of SphK2 led to significantly more severe arthritis.
Therefore, SphK2 plays a controversial role in arthritis.
A specific SphK2 inhibitor inhibited inflammatory arthritis in one model, while siRNA knockdown of SphK2 worsened arthritis in another.
To investigate the role of SphK2 in TNF-Alfa-induced arthritis, we developed SphK2 deficient hTNF-Alfa overexpressing mice and separately treated hTNF-Alfa mice with ABC294640, a SphK2-specific inhibitor.
Our data show that genetic inhibition of SphK2 did not significantly impact the severity or progression of inflammatory arthritis, while pharmacologic inhibition of SphK2 led to significantly more severe arthritis.
In this study, we examined the role of SphK1 and SphK2 in a murine collagen-induced arthritis model by down-regulating each isoenzyme via specific small interfering RNA (siRNA).
Together, these results demonstrate the distinct immunomodulatory roles of SphK1 and SphK2 in the development of inflammatory arthritis by regulating the release of proinflammatory cytokines and T cell responses.
Prefrontal Brodmann Areas (BA) BA46, BA47, and BA9 in autism and age-matched controls were analyzed by blinded researchers.
We show that the number of parvalbumin+ interneurons in these 3 cortical areas-BA46, BA47, and BA9-is significantly reduced in autism compared with controls.
These fetal structures generate regions with abnormal activity in autism, including the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (BA46), the pars opercularis of the inferior frontal cortex and the fusiform gyrus.
At the site of disease in leprosy, we found that S100A12 was more strongly expressed in skin lesions from tuberculoid leprosy (T-lep), the self-limiting form of the disease, compared to lepromatous leprosy (L-lep), the progressive form of the disease.
The aim of this study was to predict right ventricular dysfunction (RVD) using plasma concentration of D-dimer, pro-atrial natriuretic peptide (pro-ANP), brain natriuretic peptide (BNP), endothelin-1 (ET-1) and cardiac troponin I (TNI) in patients with pulmonary embolism (PE).
Atrial natriuretic petide (ANP), brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) and endothelin-1 (ET-1) may reflect the severity of right ventricular dysfunction (RVD) in patients with pulmonary embolism (PE).
Acute pulmonary embolism (PE) is a life-threatening disease, and several vasoconstrictors, including endothelin-1 (ET-1), play a key role in vasoconstriction and hypoxemia during the development of PE.
Impaired repression of cone-specific genes by the corepressors atrophin-1 (dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy [DRPLA] gene product) and atrophin-2 (arginine-glutamic acid dipeptide repeat [RERE] protein) appeared to be a molecular mechanism mediating the beneficial effect of the p.R311Q mutation.
RE repeats encoded (RERE) was identified recently as a protein with high homology to the atrophin-1 protein, which appears to be causal in the hereditary neurodegenerative disorder termed dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy (DRPLA) caused by an abnormal glutamine expansion.
The gene isolated, designated RERE, has an open reading frame of 1566 amino acids, of which the C-terminal portion has 67% homology to DRPLA, whereas the N-terminal portion is distinctive.
Immunoprecipitation and in vitro binding assays demonstrate that the DRPLA and RERE proteins bind each other, for which one of the RE repeats has a primary role, and extended polyglutamine enhances the binding.
Moreover, when RERE is overexpressed, the distribution of endogenous DRPLA protein alters from the diffused to the speckled pattern in the nucleus so as to co-localize with RERE.
More RERE protein is recruited into nuclear aggregates of the DRPLA protein with extended polyglutamine than into those of pure polyglutamine.
The DNB1/ARPh gene, which was found to be ubiquitously expressed in human adult and fetal tissues, is highly related to the DRPLA gene, in which expansion of a CAG triplet appears to be causal in the dentatorubral and pallidolysian atrophy disease phenotype.
Therefore, we evaluated the roles of CSNK2A1, SIRT6, and phosphorylated SIRT6 and their relationships in breast carcinoma.
This study demonstrates that CSNK2A1 and SIRT6 are indicators of poor prognosis for breast carcinomas and that CSNK2A1-mediated phosphorylation of SIRT6 might be involved in the progression of breast carcinoma.
RNA expression levels of CDC2L1, CDC2L2, CCNL1, CCNL2, CSNK2A1, CSNK2A2, and CSNK2B genes in breast cancer subtypes were analyzed.
Recent evidence suggests the role of Wnt signaling in human breast cancer involves elevated levels of nuclear and/or cytoplasmic beta-catenin using immunohistochemistry, overexpression or downregulation of specific Wnt proteins, overexpression of CKII and sFRP4, downregulation of WIF-1 and sFRP1, as well as amplification of DVL-1.
By combining the mutational data in the Catalogue of Somatic Mutations in Cancer (COSMIC) and the spatial information in the Protein Data Bank (PDB), SpacePAC is able to identify novel mutation clusters in many proteins such as FGFR3 and CHRM2.
Colorectal cancer (HCT 116, LoVo, C 170 HM 2, CaCO-2), fibroblast (46-BR.IGI, CCD-18 Co) and fibrosarcoma (HT1080) cell lines were irradiated at 4 gray (4 Gy) and matrix metalloproteinase gene and protein expression examined over a 96 h period by real time polymerase chain reaction and gelatin zymography.
In addition, because HBL is a major enterotoxin, we also designed HBL gene-specific polymerase chain reaction (PCR) primers, i.e., Hm1 and Hm2, that generated the same results as those of the hemolysis and BCET-RPLA assays.
Primers B16S1/B16S2 and Hm1/Hm2 could be combined into a multiplex PCR system for the simultaneous detection of B. cereus group cells and the possible presence of their HBL enterotoxins.
Positive cancer invasion in the cut end was classified as hm2 or dm2 in 8 patients and em2 in 13.
Biopsy samples from five acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS)-Kaposi's sarcomas and one non-AIDS-associated Kaposi's sarcoma were assayed by in situ RNA hybridization onto paraformaldehyde-fixed, paraffin-embedded skin sections for the presence of two fibroblast growth factor gene transcripts, FGFB and FGF5.
FGF5 gene expression was detected in the characteristic Kaposi's sarcoma spindle-shaped cells in the five samples from human immunodeficiency-positive (HIV+) patients.
Furthermore, they demonstrate a contrasting expression pattern of FGF5 and FGFB genes, both involved in the growth factor pathogenic cascade leading to Kaposi's sarcoma.
Objective To explore the efficacy of ganoderma lucidum preparation(Ling Zhi) in treating APP/PS-1 transgenic mouse models of Alzheimer's disease(AD).Methods APP/PS-1 transgenic mice of 4 months were randomly divided into model group,ganoderma lucidum treatment groups,including high [2250 mg/(kg*d)] and middle [750 mg/(kg*d)] dose groups,i.e.LZ-H and LZ-M groups,and the positive control group(treated with donepezil hydrochloride [2 mg/(kg*d)]).In addition,C57BL/6J wild mice were selected as normal group.The animals were administered for 4 months.Histopathological examinations including hematoxylin-eosin(HE) staining,immunohistochemistry,special staining,and electron microscopy were applied,and then the pathological morphology and structures in different groups were compared.
For the hydrogel prepared using the comonomer mixture with 5.0 wt % SBMA, the amount of adsorbed Lyz is 0.91 myg/cm2, which corresponds to only 56.8% of the amount adsorbed on EASY DAY(R) SCLs.
Objective To evaluate the efficacy of Ganoderma lucidum preparation on the behaviors,biochemistry,and autoimmunity parameters of mouse models of APP/PS-1 double transgenic Alzheimer's disease(AD).Methods A total of 44 4-month-old APP/PS-1 double transgenic AD mice were randomly divided into AD model group,Aricept group,Ganoderma lucidum middle-dose(LZ-M)group,and Ganoderma lucidum high-dose(LZ-H)group,with 11 mice in each group.In addition,10 4-month-old C57BL/6 mice were used as the control group.Water maze test was conducted to observe the behavior changes,and the protein expressions in brain tissues were detected by Western blot analysis.The autoimmune indicators were detected by indirect immunofluorescence method.Results In the navigation experiment,the time of finding the platform was gradually shortened since the 2nd day in the control,LZ-H,and LZ-M groups,and the time of searching the platform in the AD model group gradually increased.On the 5th day,the time of finding platform was significantly shorter in control group (t=5.607,P=0.000) and LZ-H group(t=2.750,P=0.010)than AD model group.In the space exploration experiment,the number of crossing the target platform(t=2.452,P=0.025)and the residence time in the target quadrant(t=2.530,P=0.020)in AD model group mice was significantly smaller/shorter than those in control group;in addition,the number of crossing the target platform in the AD model group was significantly smaller than that in LZ-H group(t=2.317,P=0.030)and LZ-M group(t=2.443,P=0.030),while the residence time in target quadrant decreased significantly(t=2.770,P=0.020)compared with LZ-H group;the number of crossing through the target platform quadrant(t=2.493,P=0.022)and residence time in the target quadrant(t=2.683,P=0.015)in LZ-H group were significantly higher than in Aricept group.Western blot analysis showed that the expression of ApoA1 in the brain tissues of mice in LZ-H and LZ-M groups were significantly higher than those in AD model group(P&lt;0.01,P&lt;0.05);ABeta-40 expression in LZ-H group was significantly lower than that in AD model group(P&lt;0.05);the expressions of Syt1,ApoE,and ABCA1 in brain tissues of mice in LZ-H group were significantly higher than those in model group(P&lt;0.01,P&lt;0.05).The plasma IgG level in Aricept group(t=30.945,P=0.000),LZ-M group(t=25.639,P=0.000)and LZ-H group(t=4.689,P=0.001)were significantly higher than that in the control group.Conclusion Ganoderma lucidum preparation can improve behavior disorders of AD model mice,promote the expressions of ApoA1,ApoE and Syt1,inhibit the expression of ABeta-40 protein,and improve the autoimmune function.
Somatic v-Raf murine sarcoma viral oncogene homolog B (BRAF) mutation, present in approximately 10% of metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC) cases, is associated with poor prognosis.
All colorectal cancer patients tested for BRAF mutation, from October 2010 to November 2014 were identified.
The prognostic role of the V600E mutation of v-raf murine sarcoma viral oncogene homolog B1 (BRAF) in metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC) is well established, but the therapeutic regimen targeting this disease is lacking.
The aim of our study was to evaluate the incidence of KRAS, NRAS, BRAF and PIK3CA mutations in metastatic colorectal cancer patients receiving first line oxaliplatin based chemotherapy with or without bevacizumab and to evaluate their prognostic and predictive significance.
Activating BRAF (V-raf murine sarcoma viral oncogene homolog B) mutations occur in approximately 5% to 10% of patients with metastatic colorectal cancer, mostly V600E mutation, and it is associated with distinct clinical and pathological features.
This review aims to provide data about new strategies to target to BRAF gene mutation in metastatic colorectal cancer.
The variables of age, incidence of autoimmune hepatitis, model of end-stage liver disease (MELD) score, values for total bilirubin and prothrombin time-international ratio (PT-INR), and Japan Hepatic Encephalopathy Prediction Model (JHEPM) probability at registration were significantly higher in ALF patients than in ALI patients.
On the other hand, the multivariate Cox proportional hazard model showed that positivity for serum anti-PD-1 antibody, probable diagnosis based on the revised scoring system proposed by the International Autoimmune Hepatitis Group, and prothrombin activity of less than 60% were associated with the later normalization of serum transaminase levels.
Myeloma cell maturity was classified via immunophenotyping: myeloma cells showing mature plasma cell 1 (MPC-1)-positive and CD49e-positive cells were considered mature type; MPC-1-positive and CD49e-negative cells were considered intermediate type; and MPC-1-negative cells were considered immature type.
The findings of this study demonstrate the clinical importance of myeloma cell classification according to immunophenotyping using MPC-1 and CD49e antibodies to determine patient prognosis in this era of novel therapeutic agents.
On the basis of biopsies of the masses in the pharynx and finger, he was diagnosed with extramedullary plasmablastic plasmacytoma, with somewhat immature CD45(+), MPC-1(-), and CD49e(-).
Changes to CD45 negativity and MPC-1 partial positivity were seen, while CD49e negativity persisted, suggesting that the plasmablastic plasmacytoma had reverted to a more immature state.
He had the following poor prognostic factors: 1) multiple extramedullary plasmacytomas, 2) massive myelomatous effusion, 3) increasing immature myeloma cells with plasmablastic morphology, and 4) predominance of MPC1-CD49e-CD45+ phenotype immature myeloma cells.
CD32 was significantly expressed on primary myeloma cells, but immature, MPC-1- myeloma cells expressed CD32 more weakly than mature, MPC-1+ cells.
Treatment with anti-CD32 antibody decreased the viability of normal plasma cells (CD38++ CD19+) more than that of myeloma cells (CD38++ CD19-); CD32-mediated growth suppression was greater in mature MPC-1+ cells than in immature MPC-1- cells.
To date, at least 5 subpopulations of plasma cells have been identified in the bone marrow of multiple myeloma (MM) patients with regard to the expression of MPC-1, CD49e (VLA-5), and CD45: MPC-1(-)CD49e(-)CD45(+) proliferative immature cells, MPC-1(-)CD49e(-)CD45(-) immature myeloma cells, MPC-1(+)CD49e(-)CD45(-) and MPC-1(+)CD49e(-)CD45(+) intermediate myeloma cells, and MPC-1(+)CD49e(+)CD45(+) mature myeloma cells.
In 31 cases of progressive MM disease, MPC-1(-) immature and MPC-1(-)CD45(+) proliferative immature myeloma cells were significantly increased up to &gt;25% and &gt;10%, respectively, of the plasma cell fractions (CD38(++) cells), whereas there were no increases in MPC-1(-) or MPC-1(-)CD45(+) proliferative immature myeloma cells in 15 cases of stable disease.
Interestingly, the proportions of MPC-1(-) and MPC-1(-)CD45(+) immature monoclonal plasma cells also increased in the 7 progressive cases of MGUS.
Results with flow cytometry using a combination of MPC1, CD49e, and CD45 supported the morphologic findings for the myeloma cells.
Interestingly, the region encompassing the SNF1LK locus has been implicated in congenital heart defects often observed in patients with Down syndrome.
On the other hand, a significant increase was demonstrated in CD14-positive cells at 3 weeks after immunization in only arthritis-developed monkeys regardless of sex.
We previously reported the accumulation of abnormal myeloid cell populations reacting with CD14 (MY4) monoclonal antibody in the iliac and epiphyseal bone marrow of patients with severe rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
Prior to treatment, monocyte-macrophage activation in rheumatoid arthritis was signified by an increased expression of HLA-class II antigens and the CD14 antigen, and by an increased production of neopterin and interleukin-1.
Monocytes, defined by staining with the Mo-2 and Leu-M3 monoclonal antibodies which both detect the CD14 antigen, were studied in peripheral blood of control subjects and patients with rheumatoid arthritis as well as in rheumatoid synovial fluid of the latter for expression of activation/differentiation markers.
We review recent findings implicating variants of FCRL3 (gene for FC receptor-like-3 protein), SCGB3A2 (gene for secretory uteroglobin-related protein 1- UGRP1) as well as other unverified possible candidate genes for GD selected through their documented association with type 1 diabetes mellitus: Tenr-IL2-IL21, CAPSL (encoding calcyphosine-like protein), IFIH1(gene for interferon-induced helicase C domain 1), AFF3, CD226 and PTPN2.
Autoantibody-positive diabetic subjects (n = 1,384) and population-based control subjects (n = 2,235) were genotyped at 20 childhood-onset type 1 diabetes loci and FCRL3, GAD2, TCF7L2, and FTO.
We analyzed the same four 5' FCRL3 single nucleotide polymorphism markers, together with three additional exonic single nucleotide polymorphisms in the FCRL3 gene, in cohorts of white Caucasians with Graves' disease (n = 625), type 1 diabetes (n = 279), autoimmune Addison's disease (AAD; n = 200), and RA (n = 769).
In vivo, in a model of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, we show that an agonist of DR3 suppressed disease, correlating with expansion of CD4+Foxp3+ Tregs, and this protective effect was lost in Galectin-9-/- mice.
Galectin-9 concentrations in CSF were higher in SPMS patients than healthy controls and RRMS patients in both cohorts.
Our objective is to identify phenotypically the position of CD43(+) B cells among peripheral B-lineage cell compartments in healthy donors, with reference to B-cell subsets from patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).
Previous studies indicate that CD43 plays a role in regulating the adhesion of lymphocytes, cell mutation and activation, however, little is known about its effect on systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).
Two new cases of primary Ficolin-3 deficiency are reported here: a 50-year old male, suffering from membranous nephropathy and an 11-month old male infant who was operated on to repair congenital heart disease.
In order to investigate its potential pathogenicity for turkeys a UK isolate of Mim from a partridge with sinusitis was first passaged through turkey poults and then assessed for pathogenicity in turkey embryo tracheal organ cultures (TOCs) and in one-day-old turkey poults with or without turkey rhinotracheitis virus (TRTV).
Both up- and down-regulation of the Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) of the sinonasal mucosa have already been associated with the pathogenesis of chronic rhinosinusitis with (CRSwNP) or without (CRSsNP) nasal polyps.
It is suggested that elevated plasma nociceptin level found in Wilson disease patients is due to inhibition of nociceptin-inactivating Zn-metallopeptidases (aminopeptidase N (APN) and endopeptidase 24.15) by the toxic copper deposits in liver and/or brain.
It is evident from the study that body iron (serum iron, TIBC &amp; transferrin saturation) level significantly increases among acute myocardial infarction patients in Bangladesh.
We investigated the relation of NTBI, serum iron, transferrin saturation, and serum ferritin with risk of CHD and acute myocardial infarction (AMI).
In this study, the effects of chiral pesticide metalaxyl on CYP1A1, CYP1A2, CYP2B1, CYP2B2, CYP2E1 and CYP3A were investigated in human hepatoma HepG2, rat hepatic H4IIE, chicken hepatic LMH and grass carp hepatic L8824 cells.
ER+ cancers exhibited lower ADORA1, ADORA2B, and RYR1 and elevated PDE4A, CYP2A6, and CYP2E expressions.
The mechanisms were investigated by detecting levels of NADPH Oxidase 4 (NOX4),p22phox, cytochrome P4502E1 (CYP2E1),Bax,B-cell lymphoma 2 (Bcl-2),cleaved-caspase 3 and 9 and phosphorylated extracellular regulated protein kinases(ERK),phosphorylated c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), and phosphorylated p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) using real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and Western blotting.
Twenty-two variants from 21 genes (APEX1 rs1130409 and rs1760944, ATM rs664677, AXIN2 rs2240308, CHRNA3 rs6495309, CHRNA5 rs16969968, CLPTM1L rs402710, CXCR2 rs1126579, CYP1A1 rs4646903, CYP2E1 rs6413432, ERCC1 rs11615, ERCC2 rs13181, FGFR4 rs351855, HYKK rs931794, MIR146A rs2910164, MIR196A2 rs11614913, OGG1 rs1052133, PON1 rs662, REV3L rs462779, SOD2 rs4880, TERT rs2736098, and TP53 rs1042522) showed significant associations with lung cancer susceptibility with strong cumulative epidemiological evidence.
This study aimed to determine the serum levels of angiopoietin-like 4 (ANGPTL4) in patients with renal cell carcinoma (RCC) and explore its potential as a biomarker.
We have previously shown that angiopoietin-like 4 (angptl4) mRNA, a hypoxia-inducible gene, is highly expressed in clear cell renal-cell carcinoma (ccRCC), the most common subtype of RCC for which no specific marker is available.
We observed particularly high levels of ANGPTL4 mRNA in tumor cells of conventional renal cell carcinoma.
Results The smoking subgroup (n=15) of NSIP patients had a significantly lower % diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide/ alveolar ventilation (DLCO/VA) and tended to have higher SP-D values than the nonsmoking subgroup (n=16).
As compared with major IIPs such as idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis and fibrotic nonspecific interstitial pneumonia, IPPFE significantly showed higher frequency of cases with a unique pattern of serum biomarkers, which is characterized by an elevated level of SP-D with a normal range of KL-6.
However, associations of serum KL-6 and SP-D with radiologic findings in nonspecific interstitial pneumonia (NSIP) remain unclear.
To determine whether serum levels of KL-6 and SP-D reflect fibrotic and/or inflammatory processes in NSIP, we investigated the correlation between high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) findings and serum KL-6 and SP-D levels.
Serum levels of KL-6 and SP-D were measured in 21 patients with biopsy-confirmed NSIP.
Serum levels of SP-D in NSIP showed a positive correlation with the area of ground-glass attenuation without traction bronchiectasis and the inflammatory CT pattern, but the levels were inversely correlated with the area of ground-glass attenuation with traction bronchiectasis and the fibrotic CT pattern.
The results indicate that serum levels of KL-6 in NSIP reflect the overall extent of interstitial lesions, which include both inflammatory and fibrotic lesions, while the levels of SP-D mainly reflect the extent of inflammatory lesions.
Recently, we identified high expression of 2 RHOGAPs, ARHGAP11A and RACGAP1, in the basal-like breast cancer subtype.
We have established that, via the suppression of RhoA, ArhGAP11A and RacGAP1 are both critical drivers of BLBC growth, and propose that RhoGAPs can act as oncogenes in cancer.
We found significant methylation differences at a number of experimentally implicated breast cancer-related genes, including attenuated 5' untranslated region (UTR)/first exon methylation at the proinvasive ARHGAP11A gene in variant mimic-transfected cells.
Follow-up functional analyses revealed both concurrent increased ARHGAP11A mRNA expression and enhanced invasiveness in variant versus WT piR-021285 mimic-transfected breast cancer cell lines.
Expression of ARHGAP11A in cancer cells suppressed RhoA-dependent mechanisms, such as stress fiber formation and focal adhesion, which made the cells more prone to migrate.
RNAi-based inhibition of Arhgap11a reduced the invasion and in vivo expansion of cancers.
Additionally, analysis of human specimens showed the significant up-regulation of Arhgap11a in colon cancers, which was correlated with clinical invasion status.
The present study suggests that ARHGAP11A, a cell cycle-dependent RhoGAP, is a critical regulator of cancer cell mobility and is thus a promising therapeutic target in invasive cancers.
Identified genome-wide significant loci: 1) corroborated genes implicated in other studies (MTNR1B, ZNF259/APOA5, XPA/FOXE1 (TTF-2), DARC, CCR3, ABO); 2) localized novel genes in plausible biological pathways (PCSK2, ARHGAP11A, CHRNA3); and 3) revealed novel genes with unknown function in obesity pathogenesis (MATK, COL4A1).
In contrast to GTG banding, array CGH determined the exact number of deleted genes and thus allowed the identification of candidate genes for cleft palate (GREM1, CX36, MEIS2), congenital heart defect (ACTC, GREM1, CX36, MEIS2), and mental retardation (ARHGAP11A, CHRNA7, CHRM5).
The expression levels of four genes identified by microarray screening (PLCB2, HVCN1, CTSS, and DEF8) and one purine/thiopurine related gene (NME6) correlated significantly with the clinical activity of Crohn's disease.
ZNF366, involved in estrogen metabolism and progression of breast cancer, is a new biologically plausible candidate for endometriosis.
Recently, we have identified DC-SCRIPT (ZNF366) as a co-suppressor of ERAlfa and as a strong and independent prognostic marker in ESR1 (ERAlfa gene)-positive breast cancer patients.
In this study, we further investigated the molecular mechanism on how DC-SCRIPT inhibits breast cancer cell growth.
DC-SCRIPT mRNA levels from 190 primary ESR1-positive breast tumors were related to global gene expression, followed by gene ontology and pathway analysis.
The effect of DC-SCRIPT on breast cancer cell growth and cell cycle arrest was investigated using novel DC-SCRIPT-inducible MCF7 breast cancer cell lines.
In the primary ESR1-positive breast tumors, DC-SCRIPT expression negatively correlated with several cell cycle gene ontologies and pathways.
DC-SCRIPT expression strongly reduced breast cancer cell growth in vitro, breast tumor growth in vivo, and induced cell cycle arrest.
Moreover, in 1,132 primary ESR1-positive breast tumors, DC-SCRIPT expression also correlated with CDKN2B expression.
Collectively, these data show that DC-SCRIPT acts as a novel regulator of CDKN2B and induces cell cycle arrest in ESR1-positive breast cancer cells.
We recently found that DC-SCRIPT is a prognostic marker in breast cancer and a unique NR coregulator differentially regulating different classes of NRs.
In this study we aimed to validate the prognostic value of DC-SCRIPT mRNA expression in a large independent breast cancer cohort.
DC-SCRIPT mRNA levels were measured by real-time PCR in 1,505 primary invasive breast cancers and associated with outcome (disease-free survival (DFS), metastasis-free survival (MFS) and overall survival (OS)) using univariate and multivariable Cox regression analysis.
This study provides a higher level of evidence that DC-SCRIPT is indeed an independent, pure prognostic, factor for primary breast cancer and shows that DC-SCRIPT mRNA expression is most informative for either ESR1-positive and/or ESR2-low pT1 tumors.
We investigated the role of dendritic cell-specific transcript (DC-SCRIPT) as coregulator of these nuclear receptors and as a prognostic factor in breast cancer.
DC-SCRIPT expression in normal and tumor tissue from breast cancer patients was analyzed by polymerase chain reaction and immunohistochemistry.
The prognostic value of tumor DC-SCRIPT mRNA expression was assessed in three independent cohorts of breast cancer patients: a discovery group (n = 47) and a validation group (n = 97) (neither of which had received systemic adjuvant therapy) and in a tamoxifen-treated validation group (n = 68) by using a DC-SCRIPT to porphobilinogen deaminase transcript ratio cutoff of 0.15 determined in the discovery group.
DC-SCRIPT is a key regulator of nuclear receptor activity that has prognostic value in breast cancer.
Both SNP and gene-based analyses showed promising associations with breast cancer risk for 17 genes: OR10J3, FCER1A, NCF4, CNTNAP1, CTNNB1, KLKB1, ITGB2, ALOX12B, KLK2, IRAK3, KLK4, STAT6, NCF2, CCL1, C1QR1, MBP and NOS1.
When the data were divided by menopausal status, the optimal models to predict breast cancer, which included NAF hK2 or PSA and age, were 100% sensitive and 41% specific in pre- vs. 93% sensitive and 12% specific in postmenopausal women.
Several lines of evidence suggest that members of the kallikrein family are involved in various malignancies such as prostate (PSA, KLK2, KLK15), ovarian (KLK4, KLK5, KLK6, KLK8, KLK10), and breast cancer (KLK10, KLK13, KLK14).
We examined previously the steroid hormone regulation of 2 known androgen-regulated kallikreins, KLK3 (encoding PSA) and KLK2 (encoding human kallikrein 2 or hK2) in BT-474, T-47D, ZR75-1, MCF-7, MFM-223 and BT-20 human breast cancer cells and found that they were differentially regulated, with the cells showing variable responses to androgen.
Every breast cancer cell line exhibited a distinct expression pattern of the nuclear receptor co-regulators examined raising the possibility that the relative levels of these co-activators/-repressors might differentially modulate androgen receptor transcriptional activity within the promoter/enhancer region of KLK2 and KLK3 of these cells.
Like KLK2 and KLK3, the KLK5 gene is regulated by steroid hormones in the BT-474 breast cancer cell line.
KLK2 and KLK3 have important applications in prostate cancer diagnostics and, more recently, in breast cancer diagnostics.
Oligonucleotide 5'-SH-(A)(12)-AGACAAGAGAGG-3' (Oligo 1) modified AuNPs and oligonucleotide 5'-CAACAGAGAACG-(A)(12)-HS-3' (Oligo 2) modified AuNPs could hybridize with oligonulceotide 5'-CGTTCTCTGTTGCCTCTCTTGTCT-3' (Oligo 3), which resulted in the aggregation of Oligo-AuNPs probes, and triggered the increase of their average diameter.
To observe the effect of Bushen Huoxue Recipe (BHR) on inhibiting vascular calcification (VC) in chronic renal failure (CRF) rats by regulating BMP-2/Runx2/Osterix signal pathway, and to explore its possible mechanism.
Here, we report that inhibition of Src significantly reduced survival of H37Rv as well as multidrug-resistant (MDR) and extremely drug-resistant (XDR) strains of M. tuberculosis in THP-1 macrophages.
Src inhibition was also effective in controlling M. tuberculosis infection in guinea pigs.
In guinea pigs, reduced M. tuberculosis burden due to Src inhibition also led to a marked decline in the disease pathology.
We propose that Src inhibitors could be developed into effective host-directed anti-TB drugs, which could be indiscriminately used against both drug-sensitive and drug-resistant strains of M. tuberculosis.
We explored tyrosine kinase Src as a host factor exploited by virulent M. tuberculosis for intracellular survival.
We show that Src inhibition can effectively control tuberculosis in infected guinea pigs.
In the current study we aimed to find out the impact of cytokine-inducible Src homology 2 domain protein (CISH) gene polymorphisms on the risk of pulmonary tuberculosis (PTB) in a sample of Iranian population.
A recent multi-center case-control study identified several single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within the cytokine-inducible SRC homology 2 domain (CISH) gene that are associated with susceptibility to tuberculosis (TB) in both African and Asian populations.
Among them, the human Cytokine-inducible Src homology 2(SH2) domain protein (CISH) gene has been very recently reported to be involved in T cell activation and differentiation in response to Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection.
For the first time, we report different genetic anomalies between adult and paediatric BLs, suggesting age-related heterogeneity in Burkitt lymphomagenesis.
Although there are conflicting data regarding prognostic implications of isolated MYC aberrancy in these non-BLs, the co-occurrence of MYC rearrangements and either the antiapoptotic gene B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia/lymphoma 2 (BCL2) or the transcriptional repressor BCL6 leads to an entity termed double-hit B-cell lymphoma (DHL) (or triple-hit if all 3 abnormalities are observed) with a particularly poor prognosis and no established treatment paradigms.
The clinicopathologic findings in Burkitt lymphoma (BL) and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) may show significant overlap, and MYC abnormalities, found in all BLs, also occur in a subset of DLBCL.
Double negative cases were absent in the group of BLs but could be found in approximately one third of the remaining cases of mature aggressive B-cell lymphomas.
In particular, we determined the expression and production of several angiogenic factors including tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinases-1 (TIMP-1), Leptin, connective tissue growth factor (CTGF), meningioma-associated complimentary DNA (Mac25), basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF), and Midkine.
Altered expression levels of several genes identified in this study have been previously noted in meningiomas (eg, growth hormone receptor, IGFBP-7, endothelin receptor A, IGF2).
mac25, a retinoic acid-inducible gene that is expressed at high levels in senescent epithelial cells, was initially cloned as a gene that is differentially expressed in meningioma.
mac25 had previously been cloned as a discrete gene, preferentially expressed in normal, leptomeningial cells compared with meningioma tumors.
Outcome assessments included the Sheehan Panic Disorder Scale (SPS), Panic Disorder Severity Scale (PDSS), Bandelow Panic and Agoraphobia Scale (PAS), Hamilton Rating Scale for Anxiety (HAM-A), 21-point Clinician Global Improvement Scale (CGI-21), 21-point Patient Global Improvement (PGI-21) and the Sheehan Disability Scale (SDS).
Taken together, the results of the present study concluded that human FAT2 may function as a key molecule that governs not only PCP, but also NF2-Hpo signaling in arachnoid cells; thus, a mutation in this gene may result in spinal meningioma.
Eight human STS cell lines were used: fibrosarcoma (HT1080), liposarcoma (SW872, T778, MLS-402), synovial sarcoma (SW982, SYO1, 1273), and malignant fibrous histiocytoma (U2197).
VAE diminished the CI in most of the synovial sarcoma (SW982, SYO1) and liposarcoma (SW872, T778) cell lines as well as HT1080.
A total of eight different human STS cell lines were used in the study: Fibrosarcoma (HT1080), liposarcoma (SW872, T778 and MLS-402), synovial sarcoma (SW982, SYO1 and 1273) and pleomorphic sarcoma (U2197).
In SYO-1 synovial sarcoma xenografts, administration of small molecule Tcf/Beta-catenin complex inhibitors significantly reduced tumor growth, associated with diminished AXIN2 protein levels.
These plasmids were transfected in synovial sarcoma SYO-1 cells and we observed the expression of these proteins using a fluorescence microscope.
Furthermore, cell proliferation and colony formation of synovial sarcoma SYO-1 and YaFuSS cells were suppressed by exogenous tSSX expression.
Psoriasis area and severity index (PASI), serum P-selectin and interleukin (IL)-6 were monitored throughout the treatment.
We aimed to study the association of the endothelial activation biomarkers monocyte chemoattractant protein 1 (MCP-1), soluble (s) E-selectin and P-selectin with disease activity and severity in psoriasis patients treated with anti-TNF-Alfa therapy.
Plasma soluble P-selectin concentrations, PDMP and platelet aggregation were significantly elevated in patients with psoriasis, as compared to controls.
Most efficient among them is the newly identified SOXN (neuroblastoma-derived sulfhydryl oxidase), which comprises 12 exons and maps to 9q34.3.
These results identify SOXN as a major player in regulating the sensitization of neuroblastoma cells for IFN-gamma-induced apoptosis.
The cartilage proteins melanoma inhibitory activity (MIA) and human cartilage gp-39 (HC gp-39) are candidate autoantigens in rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
The presented results confirm expression of CDRAP by normal and osteoarthritic articular chondrocytes, but indicate that increased expression levels by chondrocytes are not the cause of the increased levels of CDRAP in the synovial fluid of patients with osteoarthritis.
We have measured the concentration of cartilage-derived retinoic-acid-sensitive protein (CD-RAP) in synovial fluid (SF) from the knees of 49 patients with osteoarthritis (OA) and 79 with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) in order to investigate the correlation between the type of joint disease and level of CD-RAP.
In this study, we demonstrated that osteopontin (OPN) was dramatically reduced by loss of TSC1/TSC2 complex in Tsc2-null mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs), rat uterine leiomyoma-derived Tsc2-deficient cells, genetically modified mouse TSC models, and clinical samples.
TSC2-deficient Eker rat uterine leiomyoma ELT3 cells were stably transfected with empty vector or plasmid for the expression of TSC2.
By analyzing Tsc2-null mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) and rat uterine leiomyoma-derived Tsc2-null ELT3 cells, we detected evidence for the involvement of cyclooxygenase 2 (COX2) as a downstream target of mTORC1 in the development of TSC tumors.
TSC2-positive and TSC2-negative mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEF), 323-TSC2-positive and 323-TSC2-null MEF and Eker rat uterine leiomyoma (ELT3) cells were treated with doxycycline or rapamycin alone, or in combination.
Importantly, rapamycin treatment did not affect the expression of AdPLA2 and the production of PGE2 by TSC2-deficient mouse embryonic fibroblast (Tsc2-/-MEFs), rat uterine leiomyoma-derived ELT3 cells, and LAM patient-associated renal angiomyolipoma-derived "mesenchymal" cells.
Loss of the Tuberous Sclerosis 2 (TSC2) tumor suppressor has been proposed as a mechanism important for the etiology of uterine leiomyomata based on the Eker rat model.
However, conflicting evidence showing increased TSC2 expression has been reported in human uterine leiomyomata, suggesting that TSC2 might not be involved in the pathogenesis of this disorder.
In cell culture models of TSC2-deficient LAM patient-derived and rat uterine leiomyoma-derived cells, we found that progesterone treatment or progesterone plus estradiol resulted in increased phosphorylation of Protein Kinase B (Akt) and Extracellular signal-regulated kinases1/2 (ERK1/2), induced the proliferation, and enhanced the migration and invasiveness.
We report here that expression of AlfaB-crystallin was upregulated in Tsc1-/- or Tsc2-/- mouse embryonic fibroblasts, Eker rat uterine leiomyoma-derived Tsc2-deficient ELT3 cells, mutant Tsc2-associated mouse kidney tumors, and human lung lymphangioleiomyomatosis nodules.
Female Eker rats harboring an insertional deletion in one copy of the tuberous sclerosis complex 2 (Tsc2) gene develop uterine leiomyoma, but the underlying mechanism of human uterine leiomyoma is not completely understood.
To examine whether down-regulation of tuberin, a TSC2 gene product, is present in human uterine leiomyoma, we analyzed leiomyoma and matched myometrium tissues from 22 Chinese patients with Western blotting and real-time polymerase chain reaction analyses, and found that the expression of tuberin was significantly increased in leiomyoma tissues compared with matched myometrium tissues with inhibition of both the mammalian target of rapacmycin pathway and mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways.
Cells derived from an Eker rat uterine leiomyoma (ELT3 cells) are Tsc2-null and these have been used in a rodent cell models for LAM.
In patients with rheumatoid arthritis, furin is reported to be highly expressed in the synovial pannus compared with healthy persons.
Inhibition of furin enhances invasive phenotype of synoviocytes from patients with rheumatoid arthritis, implying a protective role of furin.
Agents targeting upregulation of furin may have therapeutic potential for rheumatoid arthritis.
The effect of furin and its inhibitor Alfa1-PDX was tested in mice with collagen-induced arthritis (CIA).
Systemic administration of furin prevented increases in the arthritis score, joint destruction, and bone loss, in contrast to systemic administration of the furin inhibitor Alfa1-PDX, which enhanced these parameters.
They also suggest that Adamts5 induction in joint components other than cartilage, and its post-translational activation by PACE4 and/or furin may be important in the pathophysiology of arthritis.
When comparing the chorioamniotic membranes from women in spontaneous preterm labor with acute histologic chorioamnionitis to those without this placental lesion, we found that (1) the mRNA of NLR family pyrin domain-containing protein ( NLRP) 1, NLRP3, NLR family CARD domain-containing protein 4 ( NLRC4), and NOD2 were higher; (2) the NLRP3 protein was increased; (3) the mRNA and active form (p10) of CASP-1 were greater; (4) the mRNA and active form of CASP-4 were increased; (5) the mRNA and mature form of IL-1Beta were higher; (6) the mature form of IL-18 was elevated; and (7) ASC/CASP-1 complex formation was increased.
When comparing the chorioamniotic membranes from women in spontaneous labor at term with acute histologic chorioamnionitis to those without this placental lesion, we found that (1) the messenger RNA (mRNA) abundance of NLR family pyrin domain containing 3 ( NLRP3), NLR family CARD domain containing 4 ( NLRC4), absent in melanoma 2 ( AIM2), and nucleotide binding oligomerization domain 2 ( NOD2) was higher; (2) the NLRP3 and NLRC4 protein quantities were increased; (3) the mRNA and protein expressions of CASP-1 and its active forms were greater; (4) CASP-4 was increased at the mRNA level only; (5) the mRNA and protein expressions of IL-1Beta and its mature form were higher; and (6) a modest increase in the total protein concentration and abundance of the mature form of IL-18 was observed.
Mutations in NLRP7 (NOD-like-receptor family, pyrin domain containing 7) are responsible for a type of recurrent pregnancy loss known as recurrent hydatidiform mole (HYDM1).
NRG1 fusion-positive lung cancers have emerged as potentially actionable events in lung cancer but clinical support is currently limited and no evidence of efficacy of this approach in cancers beyond lung has been shown.
In patient 1 an SDC4-NRG1 gene fusion was detected, similar gene fusions having been described in lung cancers previously.
Unexpected molecular lesions of the NRG1 gene followed by an aberrant ErbB signaling were recently described as a new molecular features of non-small cell lung cancer, but it has been also sporadically reported in other tumors.
We highlight the current knowledge about the ErbB network and NRG1 deregulation in lung cancer and their merger into the ErbB/PI3K-AKT axis modulation and current therapeutic strategies.
More advances in knowledge of crosstalk between NRG1, ErbB3 and PI3K-AKT pathways may increase and strongly support the therapeutic choice for lung cancer patients.
All coding exons of SCN1B, GABRG2, and CACNB4 genes were screened for mutations in 38 SCN1A-mutation-positive SMEI probands.
Following the univariate analysis, high expressions of nuclear Beta-arrestin1 and p300 were classed as poor prognostic factors for both OS (P = .016) and DFS (P = .025).The expression of Beta-arrestin1 in the nucleus is associated with increased malignant tendency of lung adenocarcinoma, and the predictive value of Beta-arrestin1 may be optimized by combining information about the expression of p300 acetyltransferase.
Furthermore, we demonstrated that the activation of COX-2 expression by hnRNPA2/B1 was mediated through the cooperation with p300, a transcriptional co-activator, in NSCLC cells.
PPARGC1A and PPARGC1B) are key agents in the development and pathophysiology of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM).
Furthermore, eight of the 17 CpG sites reside in genes (FSTL1, SORCS2, NRF1, DLC1, PPARGC1B, CHN2, NXPH1) that have prior known associations with obesity, diabetes, and the insulin pathway.
No significant associations were found, although the top significant CpGs in boys were located in the LRPAP1, HAGH, PPARGC1B, KCNQ1 and KCNQ1DN genes, previously associated to birth weight, Type 2 diabetes, obesity or steroid hormone signaling.
We used a two-stage study design to evaluate whether variations in the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPAR) and the PPAR gamma co-activator 1 (PGC1) gene families (PPARA, PPARG, PPARD, PPARGC1A, and PPARGC1B) are associated with type 2 diabetes (T2D) risk.
A recently identified muscular dystrophy gene TOR1AIP1 was detected as a hub gene in dysferlinopathy.
TorsinA-interacting protein 1 (TOR1AIP1) gene is a novel gene that has recently been described to cause limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD) with mild dilated cardiomyopathy.
We report a family with mutations in TOR1AIP1 where the striking clinical feature is severe cardiac failure requiring cardiac transplant in two siblings, in addition to musculoskeletal weakness and muscular dystrophy.
These scientific contributions strengthen the role of LAP1 in DYT1 dystonia and muscular dystrophy.
Moreover, LAP1 also interacts with torsinA and emerin, proteins involved in DYT1 dystonia and X-linked Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy disorder, respectively.
Deletions encompassing TAK1-binding protein 2 (TAB2) associated with isolated and syndromic congenital heart defects.
Haploinsufficiency of TAB2 was recently implicated as a cause for a variety of congenital heart defects.
This is the smallest reported deletion involving TAB2 that segregates with congenital heart defects.
Findings from this family support a key role of TAB2 haploinsufficiency in congenital heart defects and expand the phenotypic spectrum of TAB2-microdeletion syndrome.
In addition, the present deletion is the smallest so far recorded in the 6q25 region encompassing eight known genes [vs. 41 of Bisgaard et al., and 23 of Caselli et al.,], including the TAB2 (likely responsible for the girl's congenital heart defect), LATS1 gene, and the UST gene (a regulator of the homeostasis of proteoglycans, which could have played a role in the abnormal dermal and cartilage elasticity).
The isozymes hPAD2 and hPAD4 have been implicated in the development and progression of several autoimmune diseases, including rheumatoid arthritis and multiple sclerosis.
Protein arginine deiminase 2 (PAD2) plays a key role in the onset and progression of multiple sclerosis, rheumatoid arthritis, and breast cancer.
The enzyme peptidylarginine deiminase 2 (PAD2) has been associated with inflammatory diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis and neurodegenerative diseases including multiple sclerosis.
Peptidylarginine deiminase 2 (PAD2) and peptidylarginine deiminase 4 (PAD4) are two members of PAD family which are over-expressed in the multiple sclerosis (MS) brain.
Recent studies have revealed that abnormal activation of PADI2, the gene for which is expressed throughout the nervous system, is likely to be related to the pathogenesis of neuropsychiatric diseases with neurodegenerative processes, such as Alzheimer's disease and multiple sclerosis.
VEGF-Flt-1 signaling induces osteoclastogenesis in OSCC through two possible ways: 1) VEGF produced from OSCC cells can directly stimulate the Flt-1 pathway in preosteoclasts to induce migration to future bone resorbing area and differentiation into osteoclasts, and 2) VEGF-Flt-1 signaling upregulates RANKL expression in OSCC cells, which indirectly leads to osteoclast differentiation.
Thus, the transcriptional targets normally activated by RANKL that promote a proliferative response in luminal progenitors can contribute to the susceptibility of mammary epithelial cells to BRCA1-mutated breast cancers as a consequence of DDR-induced NF-kappaB.
Our finding provides mechanistic support for a breast cancer chemoprevention trial with a RANKL inhibitor among high-risk premenopausal women with dense breasts.
The present study examined the effects of brucine on the OPG/RANKL/RANK signaling pathway for exploring the mechanism of brucine suppression of bone metastasis in breast cancer.
In the present study, we evaluated the clinical usefulness of OPG and sRANKL assessment in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) of patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
We measured the concentration of OPG and sRANKL in BALF of 44 NSCLC patients and 15 healthy volunteers taken as control subjects.
There were no significant differences in sRANKL content between the NSCLC and control groups [1.22 (0.74-23.00) vs. 1.12 (0.79-4.39) pmol/l; p = 0.67].
However, we found that the greater the level of sRANKL in NSCLC patients, the shorter the overall survival.
We found a correlation between the content of sRANKL and the percentage of lymphocytes in BALF of NSCLC patients (r = 0.52; p = 0.041).
A high level of sRANKL in BALF of NSCLC patients may predict worse survival.
The goal of our study was to assess the prognostic impact of the necroptosis relative protein RIPK1 genetic polymorphism in ischemia-reperfusion injury and survival after hepatectomy in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) patients.
Here, we discuss our recent data on RIPK1 in liver injury and hepatocellular carcinoma development and put these into relation to previous experimental findings to underpin that it exerts opposing kinase-dependent and kinase independent functions in liver cells.
Moreover, loss of both Ripk1 and Traf2 in LPC not only resulted in caspase-8 hyperactivation but also impaired NF-KB activation, promoting the spontaneous development of hepatocellular carcinoma.
The single-stranded DNA cytidine deaminases APOBEC3B, APOBEC3H haplotype I, and APOBEC3A can contribute to cancer through deamination of cytosine to form promutagenic uracil in genomic DNA.
To study this, we developed a method to purify full length APOBEC3B and characterized it in comparison to APOBEC3A and APOBEC3H on substrates relevant to cancer mutagenesis.
A3H-I also associates with clonal TCA/T-biased mutations in lung adenocarcinoma suggesting this enzyme makes broader contributions to cancer mutagenesis.
These studies combine to suggest that A3B and A3H-I, together, explain the bulk of 'APOBEC signature' mutations in cancer.
TCGA data analyses revealed that expression of APOBEC3D and APOBEC3H also correlates with CD3D across multiple cancer types.
We found that the T allele of rs139293 in exon 2 of APOBEC3H was significantly associated with decreased risk of lung cancer (odds ratio = 0.76, 95% confidence interval: 0.63-0.91).
These results indicate that genetic variants in APOBEC3H may contribute to lung cancer susceptibility in Chinese population.
A 56-year-old male with cirrhosis presented with acute bleeding from cardiofundal gastroesophageal varices (GOV) and was treated with endoscopic cyanoacrylate glue.
At that time, he underwent retreatment with balloon-occluded retrograde obliteration (BRTO), with no recurrence at a follow-up of 14 months.Available treatments for bleeding GOV include methods to (a) directly obstruct the varices (endoscopic variceal ligation , sclerotherapy and cyanoacrylate glue, BRTO) or to (b) decrease portal pressure (surgical portacaval shunts; transportal intrahepatic portosystemic shunt).
Gastroesophageal varices (GOV) is a common complication in patients with portal hypertension.
Gastric varices were categorized as GOV-1 (3%), GOV-2 (61%), and isolated gastric varices type 1 (36%) per Sarin classification.
Of the 9 children with associated gastroeosophageal varices (GOV), the severity of lesions was reduced in 8 of them.
Here, we address the contribution of the EP3 receptor in dictating early outcomes after transient cerebral ischemia.
Following S1, separate scalp recordings in 4 patients in the epilepsy group displayed EP 3 times in the 'over 300 ms' time window.
Conversely, patients with endometriosis had significantly shortened activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) when compared to controls (1.08 +/- 0.06 and 1.12 +/- 0.19, respectively; P &lt; .01).
Activated partial thromboplastin time is shorter in women with endometriosis but still in the normal range.
Are the levels of total circulating cell-derived microparticles (cMPs) and circulating tissue factor-containing microparticles (cMP-TF) increased in patients with endometriosis?
Increased expression of tissue factor (a transmembrane receptor for Factor VII/VIIa) in eutopic and ectopic endometrium from patients with endometriosis has been described.
Tissue factor (TF) expression was elevated in endometriosis and TF concentrations were significantly elevated both in the supernatant of cultured primary endometriotic stromal cells and in peritoneal fluid from women with endometriosis.
Here, we first determined the value of ALCAM as a marker of recurrence in endometrioid endometrial cancer by conducting a retrospective multicentre study of 174 primary tumours.
Then we demonstrated in vitro a role for ALCAM in cell migration and invasion by using a loss-of-function model in two endometrial cancer cell lines.
In conclusion, our results highlight the potential of ALCAM as a recurrent biomarker in early-stage endometrioid endometrial cancer and point to ALCAM as an important molecule in endometrial cancer dissemination by regulating cell migration, invasion, and metastasis.
Overexpressing miR-378 in ovarian cancer cells altered expression of genes associated with angiogenesis (ALCAM, EHD1, ELK3, TLN1), apoptosis (RPN2, HIPK3), and cell cycle regulation (SWAP-70, LSM14A, RDX).
Activated leukocyte cell adhesion molecule (ALCAM) is expressed at the surface of epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) cells and is released in a soluble form (sALCAM) by ADAM-17-mediated shedding.
Here, we show that serum sALCAM levels were significantly higher in epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) (p &lt; 0.005) than in controls.
To date there are no data on the role of ALCAM in cervical cancer available.
In this study, ALCAM expression was analysed by immunohistochemistry (IHC) in tissue samples of 233 patients with cervical cancer, among them 178 with complete follow-up information.
ALCAM overexpression was detected (immunoreactive score (IRS) 2-12) in 58.4% of the cervical cancer samples.
ESs and USTSs were further separated by CD166 staining, wherein increased expression was associated with ES (P &lt; 0.0001).
USP22 is one of the important targets for inhibiting tumor growth, but clear illustration regarding its effects of telomerase, tumor cell immortality and retinoblastoma cell aging or apoptosis via suppressing TERT/P53 signal pathway remains to be elusive.
USP22 played an important role in retinoblastoma cell proliferation/aging and apoptosis.
The reduction of USP22 expression facilitated human retinoblastoma cell aging or apoptosis via suppressing TERT/P53 signal pathway.
USP22, thus, may work as a target for treating retinoblastoma.
The present study aimed to investigate the correlation of ubiquitin-specific peptidase 22 (USP22) with acquired resistance to cisplatin in lung adenocarcinoma.
USP22 is a potential target in cisplatin-resistant lung adenocarcinoma and should be considered in future therapeutic practice.
Ubiquitin specific peptidase 22 (USP22), a putative cancer stem cell marker, is overexpressed in liver metastases of colorectal cancer (CRC).
In this study, we explored the functional role of USP22 in modulating c-Myc stability and its physiological relevance in breast cancer progression.
We found that USP22 promotes deubiquitination of c-Myc in several breast cancer cell lines, resulting in increased levels of c-Myc.
Furthermore, overexpression of USP22 stimulates breast cancer cell growth and colony formation, and increases c-Myc tumorigenic activity.
In conclusion, the present study reveals that USP22 in breast cancer cell lines increases c-Myc stability through c-Myc deubiquitination, which is closely correlated with breast cancer progression.
In this study, we investigated the effects of the deubiquitinating enzyme USP22 on the expression of the drug-resistance genes BMI1 and EZH2 in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and on prognosis.
Ubiquitin-specific protease 22 (USP22) aberrance has been implicated in several malignancies; however, whether USP22 plays a role in anaplastic thyroid carcinoma (ATC) remains unclear.
Curcumin might have therapeutic potential in breast cancer through regulating breast cancer-related genes, including SERPINE1, PGAP3, MAP3K1, MAPK1, GSTO2, VIM, SPARC, and FGF2.
Our data showed that the level of CENPE, BAG2, SOD2, GDI2, CORO1C, CFL1, DSTN, CALD1, PHGDH, PDHA1, AKR1B1, TST and TBCA proteins were significantly up-regulated in the fibroblasts co-cultured with ovarian cancer cells, whereas HSPB1, P4HB and VIM were significantly down-regulated.
Previously, using systems biology approach and cancer signaling networks, we identified top-5 highly expressed and connected proteins (HSP90AB1, CSNK2B, TK1, YWHAB and VIM) in the invasive MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cell line.
MiR-208b was also upregulated in DCM patients, but not in heart failure patients due to ischemic heart disease or myocarditis.
Elevated cAMP levels increased cell size and altered expression levels of cardiac genes and micro-RNAs associated with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), including Myh6, Myh7, Myh7b, Tnni3, Anp, Bnp, Gata4, Mef2c, Mef2d, Nfatc1, miR208a, and miR208b.
The aim of this study was to determine whether miR-208, miR-208b, and miR-499 are expressed with MHC mRNA in human dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), and whether these levels are related to left ventricular (LV) function and to clinical outcomes.
The goal of this study was to examine the long-term effects of maternal postpartum corticosterone (CORT, a model of postpartum depression) and concurrent FLX on hippocampal neurogenesis in male and female offspring.
Using high-resolution magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), the present pilot study examined the relationship between morning serum cortisol, DHEA(S), and HCV in nineteen normal controls and eighteen unmedicated subjects with Major Depressive Disorder (MDD).
To assess the association of neural development-related genes LIS1and TSNAX with bipolar disorder in a Chinese Han population.
Our results indicated that LIS1 and TSNAX genes are not associated with susceptibility to bipolar I disorder in Chinese Han population.
The translin-associated factor X gene (TSNAX)/disrupted-in-schizophrenia-1 gene (DISC1) has been associated with psychiatric disorders, including schizophrenia, MDD and bipolar disorder.
Several investigations have reported that the translin-associated factor X gene (TSNAX)/disrupted-in-schizophrenia-1 gene (DISC1) was associated with major psychiatric disorders including schizophrenia, bipolar disorder (BP), and major depressive disorder (MDD).
The Translin-associated factor X/Disrupted in Schizophrenia 1 (TRAX/DISC) region was first implicated as a susceptibility locus for schizophrenia by analysis of a large Scottish family in which a t(1;11) translocation cosegregates with schizophrenia, bipolar disorder and recurrent major depression.
Two further regions, one in TRAX and the second in DISC1, showed weaker evidence for sex-specific associations of individual haplotypes with bipolar disorder in men and women respectively, P&lt;0.01.
Compared with non-CKD controls, mice with CKD had downregulated expression of GSTA4 at the mRNA and protein levels, with concomitant increase in 4-HNE in arteries and veins.
The data showed age-related upregulation of downstream signaling molecules such as mitogen activated protein kinases (MAPKs), activator protein-1 (AP-1), NF-KB, and COX-2 in a cell culture cell system.Taken together, the results of this study show that the formation of adducts between 4-HNE and Src activates inflammatory signaling pathways in the aged kidney, contributing to age-related nephropathy.
Elevated plasma 4-HNE has been associated with renal failure, septic shock and cardiopulmonary bypass surgery.
Additionally, the effect of PlGF (inhibition) on IOP was investigated, since aqueous PlGF is known to be upregulated in glaucoma patients.
Inhibition of PlGF also might open alternative perspectives as IOP-lowering strategy for glaucoma patients with increased aqueous PlGF levels.
To evaluate changes in the concentrations of placental growth factor (PlGF) and vascular endothelial growth factor-A (VEGF-A) in aqueous humor of patients with neovascular glaucoma (NVG) before and after an intravitreal injection of ranibizumab (IVR) and to determine the underlying correlation between the levels.
ELISA experiments showed that PlGF levels were significantly increased in aqueous humour of glaucoma patients and after VEGF treatment, which may indicate an important contribution of this growth factor to wound healing after trabeculectomy.
Using a mouse model of glaucoma filtration surgery, we were able to show that intracameral injection of a previously characterized anti-PlGF antibody (ThromboGenics NV) significantly improved surgical outcome by increasing bleb survival and bleb area.
The 17-phenyl PGF(2Alfa) analogue bimatoprost (10a) is the most efficacious ocular hypotensive agent currently available for the treatment of glaucoma or ocular hypertension.
Latanoprost, a synthetic derivative of the natural prostaglandin F(2a) (PGF(2a)), is a powerful antiglaucoma agent with ocular hypotensive and neuroprotective effects.
Endotoxaemia enhanced early VT occurs in a TLR-4 and ICAM-1 dependent fashion, and is potentiated by neutropenia.
The aim of this study was to investigate the mannose-binding lectin 2 (MBL-2), interleukin (IL)-4, Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR-4), angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE), chemokine receptor 5 (CCR-5), and IL-1 receptor antagonist (RA) gene polymorphisms (GPs) in acute leukemias (ALs) and to evaluate their roles in febrile neutropenia (FN) resulting from chemotherapy.
In a multivariate analysis, adjusted for occurrence of graft-versus-host-disease, Cytomegalovirus serostatus and duration of neutropenia, paired presence of the TLR4 1063A&gt;G and IFNG 874T&gt;A single nucleotide polymorphisms showed a trend towards increased susceptibility to invasive aspergillosis (p = 0.04).
Four SNPs in the TLR4 gene (rs10759931, rs11536889, rs1927911 and rs6478317) were associated with an increased risk of developing chemotherapy-induced neutropenia, each sustaining correction for multiple testing.
The rs1064395 single nucleotide polymorphism, within the gene encoding neurocan (NCAN), is reported to be associated with schizophrenia in European populations and may influence brain structure in patients with schizophrenia.
In this study, we aimed to explore whether NCAN rs1064395 confers some risk for schizophrenia and cognitive dysfunction in Han Chinese.
The A allele of the single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs1064395 in the NCAN gene has recently been identified as a susceptibility factor for bipolar disorder and schizophrenia.
Recently, it was shown that some CSPGs members like aggrecan, versican, and neurocan were strongly involved in brain disorders like bipolar disorder (BD), schizophrenia, and ADHD.
Recent studies have provided strong evidence that variation in the gene neurocan (NCAN, rs1064395) is a common risk factor for bipolar disorder (BD) and schizophrenia.
In this work, authors investigated the association between previously confirmed bipolar disorder genetic risk factor- neurocan with schizophrenia in a population sample of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
A case-control analysis of common genetic polymorphism within neurocan gene and schizophrenia status in a consecutively sampled patient cohort have been done using Fisher-exact test with odds-ratio calculation.
Our data suggest that genetic variation in NCAN is a common risk factor for BD and schizophrenia.
In contrast, studies have associated primary biliary cirrhosis and primary sclerosing cholangitis with genes encoding major histocompatibility complex proteins and identified loci associated with microbial sensing and immune regulatory pathways outside this region, such as genes encoding IL12, STAT4, IRF5, IL2 and its receptor (IL2R), CD28, and CD80.
In this condition, 8CR inhibited edema and myonecrosis induced by the sPLA2 activity of Crotalus durissus terrificus in a dose-dependent manner by decreasing interleukin-1Beta (IL-1Beta), tumor necrosis factor Alfa (TNF-Alfa), prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), and lipid peroxidation.
In addition, it was shown that Crotalus durissus terrificus sPLA2 increases cell oxidative stress during edema and myonecrosis, and the antioxidant properties of the polyphenolic compound may be significant in mitigating the pharmacological effect induced by sPLA2 and other snake venom toxins.
Therefore, it's necessary to express CssPLA2 in water-soluble form and determine whether the enzymatic activity of CssPLA2 or cell signalling pathways is involved in liver fibrosis caused by clonorchiasis.
We sought to investigate if mast cell activation and increases in secretory sPLA2s are associated with an increase in PAF and occurrence of dengue haemorrhagic fever (DHF).
The changes in the levels of mast cell tryptase, PAF and the activity of sPLA2 were determined throughout the course of illness in 13 adult patients with DHF, and 30 patients with dengue fever (DF).
The difference in serum levels of PLA2G2A was analyzed among chronic hepatitis B (CHB), LC, and HCC patients.
We have previously shown that secreted phospholipases A2 (sPLA2s) from animal venoms inhibit the in vitro development of Plasmodium falciparum, the agent of malaria.
In addition, the inflammatory-type human group IIA (hGIIA) sPLA2 circulates at high levels in the serum of malaria patients.
Together, our findings indicate that 4 human sPLA2s are active against P. falciparum in vitro and pave the way to future investigations on their in vivo contribution in malaria pathophysiology.
Two subtypes of phospholipases A2 (PLA2s) with the ability to induce myonecrosis, 'Asp49' and 'Lys49' myotoxins, often coexist in viperid snake venoms.
In order to assess the contribution of the IL-18 to susceptibility to Chronic Chagas Disease, we investigated the association between a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) located in the IL-18 gene with the risk of developing Chagas cardiomyopathy.
We analyzed the rs2043055 marker in the IL18 gene in a cohort of Chagas disease cardiomyopathy patients (n=849) and asymptomatic subjects (n=202).
To describe a peculiar flecked-retina phenotype in a young female affected by early-onset retinal dystrophy due to a heterozygous mutation in the cone-rod transcription factor CRX gene.
We identified a novel early-onset retinal dystrophy-related heterozygous CRX mutation associated with early and severe rod and cone dysfunction and regressive flecked-retina appearance on ophthalmoscopy.
We found that retinal disease-related genes were efficiently detected in CRX-transduced cells, most of which are crucial to photoreceptor functions.
Moreover, by modification of the culture conditions including additional transduction of RAX1 and NEUROD1, we found a greater variety of retinal disease-related genes than that observed in CRX-transduced PBMCs.
These data suggest that CRX acts as a master control gene for reprogramming PBMCs into photoreceptor-like cells and that our induced photoreceptor-like cells might contribute to individualized drug screening and disease modeling of inherited retinal degeneration.
Finally, anisomycin was the highest correlation with DEGs.MiR-124a might be involved in the pathogenesis of hypertension via targeting Ebf3 and Rgs7 bp, which possibly represent a novel and effective strategy for treatment of hypertension.
The serum miR-124 expression levels in 114 osteosarcoma patients, 40 periostitis patients and 50 normal controls were detected using real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR).
The level of serum miR-124 was remarkably decreased in osteosarcoma patients when compared to periostitis patients and healthy controls (both p&lt; 0.05).
Moreover, the Kaplan-Meier method with log-rank test showed that osteosarcoma patients with lower serum miR-124 levels had unfavorable 5 year overall survival and disease free survival rates.
It was also demonstrated that miR-124-3p expression was positively associated with mTOR signaling and this relationship was dependent on the tuberous sclerosis proteins 1/2 complex.
Among these microRNAs, miR-142-3p/5p and miR-146a expression was found to be significantly increased in MPA-treated lupus CD4(+)T cells compared to untreated controls.
To examine the role of microRNA-142-3p/5p (miR-142-3p/5p) in the development of autoimmunity in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).
To establish the cytologic and immunocytochemical features of lymphangioleiomyomatosis (LAM) cell clusters (LCCs) and to clarify its diagnostic significance for LAM.
This study aimed to evaluate fibrosis and elastin destruction in childhood interstitial lung disease (chILD) patients.
Inhibitors of the cGMP-degrading phosphodiesterase (PDE) 5 have achieved blockbuster status in the treatment of penile erectile dysfunction (PED).
To compare the effectiveness of the phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitor (PDE-5i) tadalafil alone and in combination with a biologically active dietary supplement (BADS) NeyroDoz, containing the precursors of serotonin in patients with erectile dysfunction (ED) associated with secondary premature ejaculation (SPE).
Of these enzymes, PDE5 has attracted a special attention over the years after its recognition as being the target enzyme in treating erectile dysfunction.
Phosphodiesterase (PDE) 5 inhibitor induced muscle relaxation in corporal smooth muscle cells and was used to treat erectile dysfunction by inhibiting cGMP degradation.
Cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP)-specific phosphodiesterase (PDE) inhibitors are hypothesized to improve cognition in schizophrenia and Alzheimer disease by increasing cGMP levels in certain brain regions.
To find out whether increased spinal nociception represents a premotor feature, experimental pain sensitivity was assessed in idiopathic REM-sleep behavior disorder (IRBD) patients with or without signs of a neurodegenerative disorder compared to early Parkinson's disease (ePD) patients and healthy controls (HC).
Phosphodiesterase (PDE) inhibitors are currently under evaluation as agents that may facilitate the improvement of cognitive impairment associated with Alzheimer's disease.
Notably, much experimental and clinical evidence show that PXR senses xenobiotics and triggers the detoxification response to prevent diseases such as diabetes, obesity, intestinal inflammatory diseases and liver fibrosis.
Rescued Tg(INV-Cst6)Cst6ichq/ichq mice survive the neonatal phase, but display severe eye pathology and alopecia after 4 mo.
Intriguingly, both Cst6(-/-)Ctsl(-/-) and Cst6(-/-)Ctsl(+/-) mice were viable, but the absence of cystatin M/E caused scarring alopecia in adult animals.
Transcription factor 4 (TCF-4) was recently identified as a candidate gene for the cause of type 2 diabetes, although the mechanisms have not been fully elucidated.
Collectively, these observations demonstrate a disease-promoting role of E2-2 dependent pDCs in the pancreas during autoimmune diabetes in the NOD mouse.
Fecal incontinence and constipation still remain the major complications after procedures for anorectal malformations (ARMs).
Numerous patients with anorectal malformations (ARMs) continue to experience fecal incontinence and constipation following surgical procedures.
Over the last two decades, advances in laparoscopic surgery and minimally invasive techniques have transformed the operative management of neonatal colorectal surgery for conditions such as anorectal malformations (ARMs) and Hirschsprung's disease.
This review describes these advances and outlines the main minimally invasive techniques currently used for management of ARMs and Hirschsprung's disease.
Further analysis of the PRKAG3 signaling pathway may provide insights into muscle physiology as well as the pathogenesis of noninsulin-dependent diabetes mellitus in humans, a metabolic disorder associated with impaired glycogen synthesis.
In primates, a PGBD3 element inserted into the Cockayne syndrome group B (CSB) gene over 43 Mya serves as an alternative 3' terminal exon, enabling the CSB gene to generate both full length CSB and a conserved CSB-PGBD3 fusion protein that joins an N-terminal CSB domain to the C-terminal transposase domain.
The CSB-PGBD3 fusion protein arose more than 43 million years ago when a 2.5-kb piggyBac 3 (PGBD3) transposon inserted into intron 5 of the Cockayne syndrome Group B (CSB) gene in the common ancestor of all higher primates.
Our data suggest that the CSB-PGBD3 fusion protein is important in both health and disease, and could play a role in Cockayne syndrome.
In this study, we searched for cerebral MBs in cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL), a unique type of small-vessel disease caused by mutations in the Notch3 gene.
Our purposes were (1) to determine the frequency, extent, and pattern of MBs in CADASIL; (2) to analyze the relationship between MBs and T2-hyperintense lesions; and (3) to evaluate the histopathology of brain tissue affected by MBs.
Focal areas of signal loss on gradient-echo images suggesting past MBs were found in 11 CADASIL individuals (69%) and no control subjects (P&lt;0.001).
The average number of MBs was 5.9+/-7.3 (range, 0 to 22) in individual CADASIL patients.
This study shows a high frequency and multiplicity of MBs in individuals with CADASIL.
At stimulation, the tubulovesicles fuse with the apical canaliculi and the HK-ATPase is incorporated into the apical membrane where it actively pumps H ions in exchange for K. Acute infection with Helicobacter pylori results in hypochlorhydria, whereas chronic infection can cause either hypo- or hyperchlorhydria, depending on the distribution of the infection and the degree of corpus gastritis.
The results directly confirm that the gastric H+/K(+)-ATPase is the causative autoantigen in the genesis of autoimmune gastritis.
We conclude that the beta subunit of the gastric H/K ATPase is a major T cell target in autoimmune gastritis and that thymic expression of a single autoantigen can abrogate an autoimmune response to multiple autoantigens.
8 cases of pneumophathia osteoplastica (ppo) of branching type observed at patients having no vascular deformities and one case of a focal ppo at a patient with mitral stenosis are reported.
CDKN3 is often overexpressed in human cancer, and this overexpression correlates with reduced survival in several types of cancer.
The mechanism of CDKN3 overexpression and the role of CDKN3 transcript variants in human cancer are not entirely clear.
Besides the full-length CDKN3 encoding transcript and a major transcript that skips exon 2 express in normal and cancer cells, minor aberrant transcript variants have been reported.
Aberrant CDKN3 transcripts were postulated to encode dominant-negative inhibitors of CDKN3 as an explanation for overexpression of the perceived tumor suppressor gene in human cancer.
However, while CDKN3 is often overexpressed in human cancer, aberrant CDKN3 transcripts occur infrequently and at lower levels.
CDKN3 mutations and copy number alternation are rare in human cancer, implying that neither loss of CDKN3 activity nor constitutive gain of CDKN3 expression offer an advantage to tumorigenesis.
Given that rapidly growing tumors have more mitotic cells, the high level of mitotic CDKN3 expression is the most plausible mechanism of frequent CDKN3 overexpression in human cancer.
This finding clarifies the mechanism of CDKN3 overexpression in human cancer and questions the view of CDKN3 as a tumor suppressor.
Abnormal expression of CDKN3 has been found in numerous types of cancer.
Since it is unclear whether CDKN3 participates in the development of human gastric cancer, this study assessed the association between CDKN3 expression and cell biological function and demonstrated the clinical significance and prognosis of CDKN3 in human gastric cancer.
In this study, we found that CDKN3 showed a high expression in 35 paired human gastric cancer tissues and was correlated with poor patient survival, AJCC clinical staging, and recurrence.
Silencing of CDKN3 in human gastric cancer cells can significantly reduce proliferation, migration, invasion, and adhesion abilities.
Also, silencing of CDKN3 in human gastric cancer cells can induce G0-G1 cell cycle arrest and apoptosis.
Detection of cell cycle marker expression showed that CDKN3 knockdown promotes cell cycle arrest by decreasing the expression of CDK2, CDC25A, CCNB1, and CCNB2 in human gastric cancer cells.
The results of this study will help elucidate the oncogene function of CDKN3 in human gastric cancer.
However, whether CDKN3 is a potential therapeutic target for breast cancer remains to be elucidated.
The present in vitro study aimed to investigate the potential roles of CDKN3 in breast cancer.
Breast cancer cell lines were used to detect CDKN3 expression, and CDKN3 expression was silenced to investigate its role in cell apoptosis, cell cycle arrest and migration.
These results suggest that CDKN3 acts as an oncogene during breast cancer progression.
CDKN3 may therefore be considered a potential target for the treatment of breast cancer.
Paradoxically, CDKN3 is often overexpressed in human cancer.
We analysed CDKN3 expression and its association with patient survival in three cohorts of lung adenocarcinoma.
We also examined CDKN3 mutations in the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and the Moffitt Cancer Center's Total Cancer Care (TCC) projects.
CDKN3 transcripts were further analysed in a panel of cell lines and lung adenocarcinoma tissues.
CDKN3 is overexpressed in non small cell lung cancer.
High CDKN3 expression is associated with poor overall survival in lung adenocarcinoma.
CDKN3 overexpression is prognostic of poor overall survival in lung adenocarcinoma.
CDKN3 overexpression in lung adenocarcinoma is not attributed to alternative splicing or mutation but is likely due to increased mitotic activity, arguing against CDKN3 as a tumour suppressor.
The cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 3 (CDKN3) gene, involved in mitosis, is upregulated in cervical cancer (CC).
The aim of this study is to investigate the possible mechanisms of silence of CDKN3 exerting the suppressive role on epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC).
Functional studies showed that silence of CDKN3 inhibited cancer cell proliferation by promoting cell cycle progression in G1 phase, decreased cell invasion and promoted EOC cells apoptosis.
These findings indicated that CDKN3 might serve as a useful potential target for treatment of ovarian cancer.
We first discovered the pro-tumor effect of a controversial cell cycle regulator, cylin-dependent kinase inhibitor 3 (CDKN3), which is highly expressed in colorectal cancer, and the possible related signaling pathways, by bioinformatics tools.
We found that CDKN3 had remarkable effects in suppressing colorectal cancer cell proliferation and migration, inducing cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in a colorectal cancer cell line, SW480 cells.
Our study, for the first time, provided consistent evidence showing overexpression of cell cycle regulator CDKN3, in colorectal cancer.
The in vitro studies in SW480 cells revealed a unique role of CDKN3 in regulating cellular behavior of colorectal cancer cells, and implied the possibility of targeting CDKN3 as a novel treatment for colorectal cancer.
However, the role of CDKN3 in Bcr-Abl-mediated chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) remains unknown.
In contrast, depletion of CDKN3 expression conferred resistance to imatinib-induced apoptosis in the leukemic cells and accelerated the growth of xenograph leukemia in mice.
Our results highlight the importance of CDKN3 in Bcr-Abl-mediated leukemogenesis, and provide new insights into diagnostics and therapeutics of the leukemia.
Using in situ hybridization, the expression of key clock genes, including period circadian protein homolog (Per) 1 and 2, cryptochrome 1 (Cry1), circadian locomoter output cycles protein kaput (Clock), brain and muscle ARNT-like protein 1 (Bmal1) and casein kinase 1Epsilon (CK1Epsilon) were retrospectively examined in 51 cases of colorectal carcinoma and 10 cases of adenoma.
The present study demonstrated that the protein expression levels of human circadian locomoter output cycles protein kaput (hCLOCK) is significantly increased, while miR-124 is attenuated in high-grade human CRC tissues and in the more invasive colorectal cancer cell lines SW620 and LOVO.
The CLOCK gene may be designated as a novel candidate for targeted gene therapy in drug-resistant ovarian cancer.
Study distribution by tumor was as follows: breast cancer (n=15), prostate cancer (n=3), pancreatic cancer (n=2), non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (n=2), glioma (n=1), chronic lymphocytic leukemia (n=1), colorectal cancer (n=1), non-small cell lung cancer (n=1) and ovarian cancer (n=1).We identified 10 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) significantly associated with cancer risk: NPAS2 rs10165970 (mixed and breast cancer shiftworkers), rs895520 (mixed), rs17024869 (breast) and rs7581886 (breast); CLOCK rs3749474 (breast) and rs11943456 (breast); RORA rs7164773 (breast and breast cancer postmenopausal), rs10519097 (breast); RORB rs7867494 (breast cancer postmenopausal), PER3 rs1012477 (breast cancer subgroups) and assessed the level of quality evidence to be intermediate.
We summarize fifteen epidemiological studies, including five studies on shift work that have indicated BMAL1, BMAL2, CLOCK, NPAS2, CRY1, CRY2, PER1, PER3 and TIMELESS as a candidate breast cancer risk variants.
This study sought to determine TANK (rs1921310, rs3820998) gene polymorphism in patients suffering from chronic periodontitis and peri-implantitis among an Iranian population.
The tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor family member-associated nuclear factor-KB (NF-KB) activator (TANK) takes part in the tumor necrosis factor-Alfa (TNF-Alfa)-mediated NF-KB signaling pathway and the interferon (IFN)-induction pathways that have relevance to HBV-related liver disease.
These results indicate that treatment with TUDCA may be helpful to counteract obesity-induced hyperinsulinemia through increasing insulin clearance, likely through enhanced liver IDE expression in a mechanism dependent on S1PR2-Insulin pathway activation.
Insulin-degrading enzyme (IDE) is a ubiquitous zinc peptidase of the inverzincin family, which has been initially discovered as the enzyme responsible for insulin catabolism; therefore, its involvement in the onset of diabetes has been largely investigated.
Impairment of the insulin-degrading enzyme (IDE) is associated with obesity and type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM).
Several mechanisms have been reported underlying the association of the two disorders, diabetes and dementia, one among which is the insulin-degrading enzyme (IDE) which is known to degrade insulin as well beta-amyloid peptides.
We concluded that vitamin D3 ameliorated insulin resistance and hyperinsulinemia in diabetic rat model received HFW through reduction of IDE and activation of insulin receptor phosphorylation.
Independently, the same approach identified a second homozygous truncating GZF1 variant in another multiplex consanguineous family affected by severe myopia, retinal detachment, and milder skeletal involvement.
Subgroup analyses found that the IL4RA I50V polymorphism was significantly associated with asthma risk in Asians (OR = 1.72, 95% CI 1.31-2.25, P&lt;0.0001), pediatric asthma risk (OR = 1.50, 95% CI 1.13-1.99, P = 0.005), and atopic asthma risk (OR = 1.88, 95% CI 1.27-2.79, P = 0.002).
To verify the association of transforming growth factor-beta1(TGF-beta1) (C-509T and T869C), CD14 (C-159T), IL-4 (C-590T), IL-4R (ILe50Val) and ADAM33 (S_2) gene polymorphisms with asthma severity in a sample of patients with mild, moderate and severe persistent atopic asthma.
To investigate the correlation between Chlamydia pneumonia (Cpn) infection and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
Chlamydia pneumoniae (Cpn) infection may play a role in the pathogenesis of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
To determine the possible association between Chlamydiae pneumoniae (Cpn) infection and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
The objective of the study was to investigate the possible association of Chlamydia pneumoniae (Cpn) in acute exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients.
Reading this article will familiarize the reader with (1) the unique chlamydial intracellular life cycle and the propensity for human chlamydial infections to become persistent and to result in immunopathologic (inflammatory) damage in target organs and (2) current evidence linking Chlamydia pneumoniae (Cpn) infection to obstructive lung diseases (asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, COPD).
Although the full clinical significance of these Cpn-obstructive lung disease associations remains to be established, reports of asthma improvement after treatment of Cpn infection deserve further investigation.
Taken together, we conclude that EGFR TKIs enhance the sensitivity of NSCLC cells to vATPase inhibitors by decreasing Hif-1Alfa/Bnip3 expression.
We found a significant upregulation of BNIP3 in human lung cancer datasets, and we identified a direct association between BNIP3 expression and survival rate of lung cancer patients.
In this study we used 115 NSCLC tissues to examine the immunohistochemical expression of four distinct molecules - the major regulator of autophagy Beclin 1, the anti-apoptotic and anti-autophagic protein Bcl-2, the pro-apoptotic and pro-autophagic protein BNIP3, and a marker of hypoxia and glucolysis, the glucose transporter Glut 1.
In conclusion, the accelerated autophagic status in NSCLC is unrelated to Beclin 1 and BNIP3 expression, but does show significant association with Bcl-2 reactivity.
This study was designed to determine the pattern and correlation between expression of the HIF-1Alfa transcriptional targets TGM2 and BNIP3 in laryngeal cancer, and investigate the association of BNIP3 and TGM2 with clinical outcome in laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) patients receiving postoperative radiotherapy.
Considering tumors with telomere shortening, expression for BNIP3, DAPK1, NDRG1, EGFR, and CDKN2A was significantly higher in NSCLC than in CRC, whereas TP53 was overexpressed in CRC with respect to NSCLC.
KIAA0513 was previously identified as upregulated in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex of subjects with schizophrenia by microarray analysis.
Higher fasting glucose levels may amplify obesity-risk in FTO carriers and lead to an exaggerated weight gain over time.
Type 2 diabetes-associated genes TCF7L2 and FTO; and a miRNA, miR21 were further investigated in another B12-supplementation cohort.
Recent studies show that FTO single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are associated with obesity and type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM).
The FTO gene is associated with type-2 diabetes (T2D) and increased fat mass.
A significant association was found between the perilipin rs1052700 polymorphism and T2D, and between the FTO rs3751812 polymorphism and obesity (P = 0.03 and 0.003, respectively); however, no significant relationship was found between rs3751812 and T2D.
The FTO rs3751812 polymorphism is a major genetic determinant of obesity, but not T2D.
Recent studies have implicated the FTO gene in child and adult obesity.
Variants (rs1558902, rs1121980, rs9939609, and rs9941349) in the fat mass and obesity-associated (FTO) gene exhibited strong but ethnicity-independent association with obesity.
There is increasing interest of which dietary patterns can modify the association of fat mass and obesity associated (FTO) variants with obesity.
This study was aimed at investigating the interaction of the Mediterranean dietary pattern (Med Diet) with FTO polymorphisms in relation to obesity phenotypes.
Obesity is a heritable disorder, and some of the many obesity susceptible genes are fat mass and obesity (FTO), leptin, and Melanocortin-4 receptor (MC4R).
We showed that: (1) there was a significant association between the biased usage of IGHV4-34 (binds to the carbohydrate I/i antigens) and inactivating mutation of TNFAIP3 [encoding a global negative regulator of the canonical nuclear factor-KB (NF-KB) pathway] in ocular adnexal MALT lymphoma; (2) IGHV1-69 was significantly overrepresented (54%) in MALT lymphoma of the salivary gland, but was not associated with mutation in any of the 17 genes investigated; and (3) MALT lymphoma lacked mutations that are frequently seen in other B-cell lymphomas characterized by constitutive NF-KB activities, including mutations in CD79B, CARD11, MYD88, TNFRSF11A, and TRAF3.
Therefore, we aim to assess the correlation of endothelin-1 concentrations with the development and severity of knee osteoarthritis (OA).
Together, the results here demonstrate that the febrile response in zymosan-induced arthritis in rats depends on the centrally acting pyrogenic cytokines TNF-Alfa, IL-1Beta, and IL-6, but does not depend on either CRF or ET-1.
Antibodies to AQP4 and AQP1 are detected in neuromyelitis optica and are believed to play a pathogenic role.
Among thirteen different mammalian AQPs, AQP1 and AQP4 have been mainly studied in the CNS and evidence has been presented that they play important roles in the pathogenesis of CNS injury, edema and multiple diseases such as multiple sclerosis, neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, glioblastoma multiforme, Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease.
ICOSL knockout (ICOSL-KO) mice and wild-type C57BL/6J mice were used as experimental Schistosomiasis model infected with Schistosoma japonicum.
The ICOS-ICOSL signaling has a regulatory effect on CD154-CD40 signaling pathway, and may play an important role in the hepatic egg granuloma formation of Schistosomiasis.
Using models of schistosomiasis in ICOSL KO and the C57BL/6 WT mice, we studied the role of the ICOSL/ICOS interaction in the mediation of the Th17 response in host granulomatous inflammation, particularly in liver fibrosis during S. japonicum infection, and investigated the immune responses and pathology of ICOSL KO mice in these models.
Importantly, there was a clearly positive correlation between the presence of IL-17-producing cells and ICOS expression in ICOSL KO mice, and additional results indicated that Th17 was involved in the pathological tissue remodeling in liver fibrosis induced by schistosomiasis.
LncRNA ZEB1 Antisense 1 (ZEB1-AS1) has been suggested to be an oncogenic role in human hepatocellular carcinoma, osteosarcoma, glioma and esophageal carcinoma progression.
ZEB1-AS1 acts as an oncogene in hepatocellular carcinoma, accelerating tumor growth and promoting metastasis.
LncRNA ZEB1-AS1 has been identified as a tumor oncogene in hepatocellular carcinoma.
We analyzed the outcome of allo-SCT in a population of FLT3-positive AML patients according to molecular MRD at the pretransplantation workup, assessed by the quantitative expression evaluation of the panleukemic marker Wilms' tumor (WT1) gene.
To determine the chemokine receptor expression profile in gastric mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphoma, we performed an expression analysis of 19 chemokine receptors at mRNA levels by using real-time RT-PCR, as well as of five chemokine receptors--CCR8, CCR9, CXCR4, CXCR6 and CXCR7--by immunohistochemistry on human tissue samples of Helicobacter pylori-associated gastritis, gastric MALT lymphoma and gastric extranodal diffuse large B-cell lymphoma originating from MALT lymphoma (transformed MALT lymphoma).
The transformation of gastric MALT lymphomas to gastric extranodal diffuse large B-cell lymphoma was accompanied by upregulation of CCR1, CCR5, CCR7, CCR8, CCR9, CXCR3, CXCR6, CXCR7 and XCR1.
Feline leukemia virus (FeLV) p27 or gp70 antigen was detected in 21 lymphomas (54%).
Vaccines to large B cell lymphoma were made by the covalent attachment of an epitope from the gp70 glycoprotein (SSWDFITV) to the N-termini of the conformationally biased, response-selective C5a agonists EP54 (YSFKPMPLaR) and EP67 (YSFKDMP(MeL)aR).
Syngeneic Balb/c mice were immunized with these EP54/EP67-containing vaccines and challenged with a lethal dose of the highly liver metastatic and gp70-expressing lymphoma cell line RAW117-H10 to evaluate the ability of these vaccines to induce protective immune outcomes.
CD8(+) T lymphocytes activated in response to Vaccines 2 and 3 express cytotoxic specificity for gp70-expressing RAW117-H10 lymphoma cells, but not antigen-irrelevant MDA-MB231A human breast cancer cells.
Our strategy relies on the fact that feline leukemia virus subgroup B (FeLV-B) and amphotropic murine leukemia virus (A-MLV) have closely related gp70 surface envelope glycoproteins and use related Na(+)-dependent phosphate symporters, Pit1 and Pit2, respectively, as their receptors.
Numerous studies have investigated the utility of serum intestinal fatty-acid binding protein (I-FABP) in differentiating acute intestinal ischemia from acute abdomen.
The aim of this meta-analysis is to determine the overall accuracy of serum I-FABP in the diagnosis of acute intestinal ischemia.
The meta-analysis carried out in this report suggests that the I-FABP may be a useful diagnostic tool to confirm acute intestinal ischemia in acute abdomen, but better-designed trials are still required to confirm our findings.
The aim of the present study was to evaluate whether I-FABP can predict active disease or remission in Crohn's disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC) in a real-life IBD cohort.
In our study, we found the expression of EWSAT1 was upregulated in ovarian cancer cell lines and samples.
Ecoptic expression of EWSAT1 suppressed miR-330-5p expression in ovarian cancer cell.
Moreover, the expression of miR-330-5p was negatively related with the expression of EWSAT1 in ovarian cancer samples.
Ecoptic expression of miR-330-5p suppressed Pdia3 expression and overexpression of EWSAT1 promoted Pdia3 expression in ovarian cancer cell.
Overexpression of EWSAT1 increased ovarian cancer cell proliferation, colony formation and invasion through targeting miR-330-5p.
These data suggested that EWSAT1 might act as an oncogene in the development of ovarian cancer partly through inhibiting miR-330-5p expression.
Recently, lncRNA Ewing sarcoma-associated transcript 1 (EWSAT1) was functionally identified in Ewing sarcoma, a highly aggressive primary pediatric bone tumor.
Long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) Ewing sarcoma associated transcript 1 (EWSAT1) has been identified as an oncogene, and its dysregulation is closed corrected with tumor progression in Ewing sarcoma.
Recently, high-through put analysis reveals that EWSAT1 is also highly expressed in human nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC).
We determined that long noncoding RNA-277 (Ewing sarcoma-associated transcript 1 [EWSAT1]) is upregulated by EWS-FLI1 in pMPCs.
Inhibition of EWSAT1 expression diminished the ability of Ewing sarcoma cell lines to proliferate and form colonies in soft agar, whereas EWSAT1 inhibition had no effect on other cell types tested.
Analysis of RNAseq data from primary human Ewing sarcoma further supported a role for EWSAT1 in mediating gene repression.
Together, our data reveal that EWSAT1 is a downstream target of EWS-FLI1 that facilitates the development of Ewing sarcoma via the repression of target genes.
Results: The data show that the expression of MZF-1/Elk-1 is correlated with that of PKCAlfa in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), but not in bladder and lung cancers.
Here, using PEI-Mn0.5Zn0.5Fe2O4 nanoparticles (PEI-MZF-NPs) as magnetic media for MFH (magnetic fluid hyperthermia) and gene transfer vector for gene-therapy, a combined therapy, pHRE-Egr1-HSV-TK/(131)I-antiAFPMcAb-GCV/MFH, for hepatoma is developed.
To explore a new combination of thermal treatment and gene therapy for hepatoma, a heat-inducible herpes simplex virus thymidine kinase/ganciclovir (HSV-TK/GCV) gene therapy system was developed in which thermal energy generated by Mn0.5Zn0.5Fe2O4 nanoparticles (MZF-NPs) under an alternating magnetic field was used to activate gene expression.
Magnet-induced heating was then applied to cells to assess the antihepatoma effects of the polyethylenimine (PEI)-MZF-NPs/pHsp 70-HSV-TK/GCV complex, in vitro and in vivo.
In this study, the molecular mechanism of protein kinase C alpha (PKCAlfa) gene regulation in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) involving Ets-like protein-1 (Elk-1) and myeloid zinc finger-1 (MZF-1) was investigated.
Besides, PEI-MZF-NPs were used as magnetic media for thermotherapy to treat hepatoma by magnet-induced heating, combined with radiation-gene therapy.
In a recent study on hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), we have shown that the transcription factors Myeloid Zinc Finger-1 (MZF-1) and Ets-like-protein 1 (Elk-1) are significantly related to protein kinase C alpha (PKCAlfa) expression.
Recently, our research into hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has shown that the transcription factors Myeloid Zinc Finger-1 (MZF-1) and Ets-like-protein 1 are related to protein kinase C alpha (PKCAlfa) expression.
Using immunocytochemistry, we investigated the distribution of chromogranin A, chromogranin B, secretoneurin, and, for comparison, dynorphin in hippocampal specimens removed at routine surgery from patients with drug-resistant mesial temporal lobe epilepsy and in autopsy tissues from nonneurologically deceased subjects.
The most intriguing change seen in human temporal lobe epilepsy specimens and in the kainic acid model of the rat was the prominent staining of the inner molecular layer, indicating storage of chromogranins A and B and secretoneurin in terminals of reorganized mossy fibers, from which they may be released upon nerve stimulation.
Transition of control prediabetic ZDF rats to diabetes was associated with reduced plasma insulin levels, reduced islet insulin content and GSIS, reduced stearoyl-CoA desaturase 2 (SCD 2) expression, and increased islet TAG, diacylglyceride (DAG) and ceramides species containing saturated FA.
In this research, we have found that lycorine significantly induces the apoptotic and autophagic capacities of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells in vitro and in vivo Treatment with specific autophagy inhibitor (3-methyladenine/Bafilomycin A1) or knockdown of LC-3B/Atg5 by siRNA drastically enhances the apoptotic cell death effect by facilitating the switch from autophagy to apoptosis.
The differential expression of 10 miRNAs were validated by RT-qPCR (let-7a, let-7d, let-7f and miR-16 were downregulated while miR-29b, miR-142-3p, miR-144, miR-203, and miR-223 were upregulated in OSCC; the expression of miR-1275 was variable in tumours, with high levels associated to regional lymph node invasion; additionally, miR-223 exhibited an association with advanced tumour stage/size).
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report to show the association of miR-1275 with nodal invasion and the upregulation of miR-144 in OSCC.
In the subgroup of non-vomiting drinkers with Wernicke's encephalopathy (WE), the slope of the linear regression of AETK on ETK was 1.21, so that apoTK decreased as ETK decreased.
In pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, the CCL2-CCR2 chemokine axis is used to recruit tumour-associated macrophages for construction of an immunosuppressive tumour microenvironment.
This pathway has prognostic implications in pancreatic cancer, and blockade of CCR2 restores anti-tumour immunity in preclinical models.
To determine the role of the CCL2/CCR2 axis and inflammatory monocytes (CCR2(+)/CD14(+)) as immunotherapeutic targets in the treatment of pancreatic cancer.
A novel CCR2 inhibitor (PF-04136309) was tested in an orthotopic model of murine pancreatic cancer.
Human pancreatic cancer produces CCL2, and immunosuppressive CCR2(+) macrophages infiltrate these tumors.
Inflammatory monocyte recruitment is critical to pancreatic cancer progression, and targeting CCR2 may be an effective immunotherapeutic strategy in this disease.
Weaver syndrome (WS) is a rare congenital overgrowth disorder caused by heterozygous mutations in EZH2 (enhancer of zeste homolog 2) or EED (embryonic ectoderm development).
We evaluated the associations of six nonsynonymous SNPs in the MMP3, MMP8, and MMP9 genes with skin cancer risk in a nested case-control study of Caucasians within the Nurses' Health Study among 218 melanoma cases, 285 squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) cases, 300 basal cell carcinoma (BCC) cases, and 870 normal controls.
Ninety-four cases of squamous cell carcinoma and 108 cases of basal cell carcinoma using tissue array in order to determine correlations between the expression of Ki-67, p53, EGFR, CD44v6, MMP-1 and MMP-3, invasiveness and histologic differentiation.
A novel zinc oxide-binding peptide (ZBP), FPYPGGDA, with high affinity to ZNP (K a  = 2.26 x 106 M-1) was isolated from a random peptide library and fused with a bacterial antigen, ScaA of Orientia tsutsugamushi, the causative agent of scrub typhus.
The results show that the main latex allergen, a glycine-rich protein molecule, can cause cutaneous, inhalant and systemic hypersensitivity reactions.
One hundred and one consecutive patients of Han nationality with rheumatic heart disease undergoing valve surgery were enrolled and randomly assigned to an experimental group (n=50, based on CYP2C9 and VKORC1 genotypes, pharmacogenetic-based "predicted warfarin dose" for 3 days and then was adjusted to INR until stable warfarin maintenance dose) or a control group (n=51, 2.5mg/d for 3 days and then was adjusted to INR until stable warfarin maintenance dose).
RNF216) have recently been identified in patients suffering from Gordon Holmes syndrome (GHS), characterized by cognitive decline, dementia, and movement disorders.
Our current findings of Arc misregulation by TRIAD3A variants suggest that loss-of-function mutations in TRIAD3A may contribute to dementia observed in patients with GHS driven by dysfunctional UPS components, leading to cognitive impairments through the synaptic protein Arc.
Gordon Holmes syndrome (GHS) is a distinct phenotype of autosomal recessive cerebellar ataxia, characterized by ataxia, dementia, reproductive defects and hypogonadism; it has been recently found to be associated with RNF216 mutation.
The syndrome of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, ataxia, and dementia can be caused by inactivating mutations in RNF216 or by the combination of mutations in RNF216 and OTUD4.
to investigate the molecular mechanisms and morphological substrate of reduced uterine leiomyoma in patients receiving the selective progesterone receptor modulator (SPRM) ulipristal acetate for 3 months, by estimating the immunohistochemical expression of the markers steroid receptor coactivator 1 (SRC-1), nuclear receptor corepressor 1 (NCoR-1), ER, PgR, Ki-67, p16, TGF-Beta, and VEGF in tumor tissue.
The morphological substrate of partial leiomyoma reduction was leiomyocyte apoptosis and dystrophy, tumor stroma sclerosis and hyalinosis with diminished Ki-67 expression and elevated p16 in the smooth muscle cells, trophic nodular tissue disorders exhibited by vascular wall sclerosis and lower VEGF and TGF-Beta expression, and leiomyocyte hormonal reception dysregulation that made itself evident through the reduced expression of SRC-1 with the unchanged expression of PR and ER and the maintained level of NCoR-1.
Uenb - N3y4NTb MoneKynRpHble MexaHN3Mbl N MopoonorN4ecKNN cybcTpaT peAyKmyNN neNoMNoMbl MaTKN y namyNeHToK, nony4aBwNx ceneKTNBHblN MoAynRTop nporecTepoHoBblx pemyenTopoB ynNnpNcTana amyeTaT B Te4eHNe 3 Mec, Ha ocHoBaHNN omyeHKN NMMyHorNcToxNMN4ecKoN EKcnpeccNN SRC-1, NCoR-1, ER, PGR, Ki-67, p16, TGF-Beta, VEGF B TKaHN onyxonN.
We find that AML1-ETO and corepressor NCoR co-occupy the miR-29a/b-1 locus and downregulate its expression in leukemia cells.
Authors present the history of a patient with extra-adrenal pheochromocytoma who represents in Hungary the first genetically confirmed case of hereditary paraganglioma/pheochromocytoma syndrome due to disease-causing mutation of the SDHD gene.
While SDHD has been more frequently associated with the pathogenesis of head and neck paragangliomas, SDHB mutations were mainly associated with malignant and/or extra-adrenal pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma.
SDHB mutation carriers were more likely than SDHD mutation carriers to develop extraadrenal pheochromocytomas and malignant disease, whereas SDHD mutation carriers had a greater propensity to develop head and neck paragangliomas and multiple tumors.
In contrast, SDHD mutation carriers, in addition to head and neck paragangliomas, should be observed for multifocal tumors, infrequent malignancy, and the possibility of extraadrenal pheochromocytoma.
However, in the presence of extra-adrenal pheochromocytoma, it may be more useful to screen for VHL, SDHD and SDHB mutations.
Here we show, using two different techniques, FISH and quantitative PCR that SHFM3 is caused by a minimal 325 kb duplication containing only two genes (BTRC and POLL).
The smaller duplication in the second patient contained the LBX1, BTRC, POLL, and DPCD genes and a disrupted extra copy of the dactylin gene, and was nearly identical to the smallest known duplicated region of SHFM3.
In the diagnostic work-up of alcoholic cardiomyopathy, the confirmation of alcohol abuse by carbohydrate deficient transferrin (CDT) and increased liver enzymes, and the involvement of the heart by markers of heart failure (e.g., NT-proBNP) and of necrosis (e.g., troponins or CKMb) is mandatory.
Each 10 myg/m(3) increment in daily mean concentration at lag 2 day was associated with a 0.61% (95% CI: 0.19%, 1.03%) increase in overall respiratory mortality and a 0.67% (95% CI: 0.14%, 1.21%) increase in pneumonia mortality.
The values of the relative risks for hospitalization for pneumonia and asthma were significant for lag 0 (RR=1.051, 95%CI; 1.016 to 1.088); lag 2 (RR=1.066, 95%CI: 1.023 to 1.113); lag 3 (RR=1.053, 95%CI: 1.015 to 1.092); lag 4 (RR=1.043, 95%CI: 1.004 to 1.088) and lag 5 (RR=1.061, 95%CI: 1.018 to 1.106).
A 10 microg/m increase in bushfire PM10 was associated with a 1.24% (95% confidence interval = 0.22% to 2.27%) increase in all respiratory disease admissions (at lag 0), a 3.80% (1.40% to 6.26%) increase in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease admissions (at lag 2), and a 5.02% (1.77% to 8.37%) increase in adult asthma admissions (at lag 0).
We confirmed that inhibition of TREM-1 attenuates the severity of colitis at clinically, endoscopically and histologically levels.
Indeed, TREM-1 receptor and its signaling pathways contribute to the pathology of several non-infectious acute and chronic inflammatory diseases, including atherosclerosis, ischemia reperfusion-induced tissue injury, colitis, fibrosis and cancer.
In CD4(+) T cell- and dextran sodium sulfate-induced models of colitis, Trem1(-/-) mice displayed significantly attenuated disease that was associated with reduced inflammatory infiltrates and diminished expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines.
In vivo, the treatment with the TREM-1 antagonist LP17 or control peptide was initiated at the beginning of or after induction of experimental colitis or colitis-associated tumorigenesis.
In ulcerative colitis, sTREM-1 level was correlated more strongly with the endoscopic activity (r=0.498) than the C-reactive protein level (r=0.386) or erythrocyte sedimentation rate (r=0.272), although not superior to the partial Mayo score (r=0.611).
In ulcerative colitis, sTREM-1 level was correlated most closely with the endoscopic disease activity among serum biomarkers, but was not superior to the clinical activity index.
Our results suggest that sTREM-1 level may represent a complementary marker for the assessment of endoscopic activity in ulcerative colitis, but not in Crohn's disease.
Intestinal biopsies and concurrently collected sera from patients with Crohn's disease (CD) and Ulcerative colitis (UC) enrolled in the Swiss IBD cohort study were analyzed for intestinal TREM-1 mRNA and serum sTREM-1 expression.
Serum sTREM-1 and TREM-1 mRNA expression levels were further determined in sera and colonic tissues collected at various time-points post disease induction in an experimental mouse model of colitis and correlated with disease activity.
Three TREM-1 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs, rs2234237, rs3789205, and rs9471535) were genotyped by Taqman technology on 202 Crohn's disease (CD), 265 ulcerative colitis (UC), 138 with intestinal Behcet's disease (BD), and 234 healthy controls and the relationships between these SNPs and IBD development and phenotypes were evaluated.
However, TREM-1 SNPs were not significantly associated with the development of Crohn's disease or ulcerative colitis.
Stable expression of miR-124 in diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL) cell lines diminished PDE4B expression.
Starting from the GSEA, we found that overexpression of the PDE4B in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) impinge on the same genes/pathways that are abnormally active in GC-resistant tumors.
On the basis of biopsies of the masses in the pharynx and finger, he was diagnosed with extramedullary plasmablastic plasmacytoma, with somewhat immature CD45(+), MPC-1(-), and CD49e(-).
Changes to CD45 negativity and MPC-1 partial positivity were seen, while CD49e negativity persisted, suggesting that the plasmablastic plasmacytoma had reverted to a more immature state.
He had the following poor prognostic factors: 1) multiple extramedullary plasmacytomas, 2) massive myelomatous effusion, 3) increasing immature myeloma cells with plasmablastic morphology, and 4) predominance of MPC1-CD49e-CD45+ phenotype immature myeloma cells.
Interestingly, the proportions of MPC-1(-) and MPC-1(-)CD45(+) immature monoclonal plasma cells also increased in the 7 progressive cases of MGUS.
The main hereditary LMNSs in adulthood are Kennedy's disease, late-onset spinal muscular atrophy and distal hereditary motor neuropathies.
In contrast, spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) involves the specific degeneration of LMNs, with symmetrical muscle weakness and atrophy.
Targeting lower motor neurons (LMNs) for gene delivery could be useful for disorders such as spinal muscular atrophy and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Our previous study showed that reduction of KCa3.1 channel expression by lyso-globotriaosylceramide (lyso-Gb3) inhibits differentiation into myofibroblasts and collagen synthesis, which might lead to development of ascending thoracic aortic aneurysm secondary to Fabry disease.
Moreover, lyso-Gb3 suppressed expression of class II phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase C2Beta (PI3KC2Beta) by PKA activation, which reduces the production of phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate [PI(3)P], and the reduced membrane surface expression of KCa3.1 channel was recovered by increasing the intracellular levels of PI(3)P. Consequently, our findings that lyso-Gb3 inhibited both KCa3.1 channel synthesis and surface expression by increasing intracellular cAMP, and controlled surface expression through changes in PI3KC2Beta-mediated PI(3)P production, suggest that modulation of PKA and PI3KC2Beta activity to control of KCa3.1 channel expression can be an alternative important target to attenuate ascending thoracic aortic aneurysms in Fabry disease.
These findings suggest that the KCa3.1 channel can serve as a new target to attenuate and prevent development of ascending thoracic aortic aneurysm in Fabry disease.
We sequenced BCAs in patients with autism or related NDDs, revealing disruption of 33 loci in four general categories: (1) genes previously associated with abnormal neurodevelopment (e.g., AUTS2, FOXP1, and CDKL5), (2) single-gene contributors to microdeletion syndromes (MBD5, SATB2, EHMT1, and SNURF-SNRPN), (3) novel risk loci (e.g., CHD8, KIRREL3, and ZNF507), and (4) genes associated with later-onset psychiatric disorders (e.g., TCF4, ZNF804A, PDE10A, GRIN2B, and ANK3).
Their protein products listed below immediately suggest cell signalling pathways/processes worthy of further investigation in elucidating the mechanism of CpG 5mer activity: caspase 2, the transcription factors Atf4, Hic, HoxB3 and Rqcd1, the splicing factors Rbmx, Sfrs5 and Sfrs7, the DNA replication factors Mcm5 and Brd4, phosphoinositide-3-kinase, annexin A1, mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma translocation 1 and three enzymes involved in protein ubiquitylation, Siah1, Gsa7 and Nin283.
Multiple cylindromas can have a syndromic association as seen in Brooke-Spiegler syndrome and familial cylindromatosis.
A predisposition to multiple cylindromas is seen in patients with Brooke-Spiegler syndrome, who carry germline mutations in the tumour suppressor gene CYLD.
Previous studies of inherited cylindromas have highlighted the frequent presence of bi-allelic truncating CYLD mutations as a recurrent driver mutation.
Here, we investigated inherited cylindromas from several families with germline CYLD mutations for the presence of MYB activation.
Cylindroma is a rare skin tumour that is inherited in several skin-tumour syndromes caused by germline mutations in the tumour suppressor gene, CYLD.
The aims of this study were to perform a whole-exome sequencing analysis of a breast cylindroma and to investigate the role of molecular analyses in the differentiation between breast cylindroma, a benign tumour that displays MYB expression, and CYLD gene mutations, and its main differential diagnosis, the breast solid-basaloid adenoid cystic carcinoma, a malignant tumour that is characterized by the presence of the MYB-NFIB fusion gene and MYB overexpression.
The clinical presentation of multiple, rare, skin appendage tumours called cylindromas has been attributed to germline mutations in the tumour suppressor gene CYLD (OMIM 605018).
Brooke-Spiegler Syndrome (BSS), familial cylindromatosis (FC) and multiple familial trichoepitheliomas (MFT) (OMIM #605041, #132700, #601606 respectively) differ due to the types of other skin appendage tumour seen together with cylindroma, such as spiradenoma and trichoepithelioma.
Unique tumors included a cutaneous cylindroma invasive of skull convexity occurring in familial cylindromatosis and a ganglioneuroma of the middle ear with massive bilateral skull base extension.
This review will examine and extrapolate from the recent literature to build support for the use of AXT in mitigating neuropathy in normal aging and neurodegenerative disease.
We investigated frequencies of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the candidate genes protein tyrosine phosphatase, non-receptor type 22 (PTPN22), B-cell scaffold protein with ankyrin repeats (BANK1), B lymphocyte kinase (Blk), and Fc gamma receptor class IIB (FCGR2B), which have been found to be associated with other autoimmune diseases, CD1A and CD1E, important for antigen presentation of glycolipids, and transient axonal glycoprotein 1 (TAG-1), which is associated with responsiveness to intravenous immunoglobulin in patients with chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy.
To investigate the clinical features of A-pattern exotropia and to evaluate the efficacy of surgical treatment for the correction of A-pattern exotropia (A-XT).
We identified 10 patients from three CA and from two GMS families with WDR73 mutations including the original family described with CA, mental retardation, optic atrophy, and skin abnormalities (CAMOS).
CAMOS (Cerebellar Ataxia with Mental retardation, Optic atrophy and Skin abnormalities) is a rare autosomal recessive syndrome characterized by a nonprogressive congenital cerebellar ataxia associated with mental retardation, optic atrophy, and skin abnormalities.
Eyes with laser-treated threshold ROP had significant myopia at both ages (mean spherical equivalent [MSE] in right eye at both refractions -0.72, -1.21 diopters [D]), astigmatism (MSE -1.62, -1.80 D), and anisometropia (MSE 0.82, 1.02 D; ANOVA p &lt; 0.05), and increased refractive errors across ages (paired t test p &lt; 0.05).
Monocular deprivation does affect the binding parameters (KD and Bmax) of GluRs, which may be a molecular mechanism of the development of amblyopia.
Expressions of GluRs and CaBPs (i.e., parvalbumin and calbindin D-28k) were observed to be increased in the retinal ganglion cell layer (GCL) and inner nuclear layer (INL) at 3 days and 1 week after the onset of glaucoma.
The finding that both NMDA and non-NMDA GluRs were involved in glutamate-induced excitotoxicity suggests that isolated pig RGCs provide a good model for glaucoma.
USP45 associates with ERCC1, a subunit of the DNA repair endonuclease XPF-ERCC1, via a short acidic motif outside of the USP45 catalytic domain.
Finally, USP45 localises to sites of DNA damage in a manner dependent on its deubiquitylase activity, but independent of its ability to bind ERCC1-XPF.
Together, these results establish USP45 as a new regulator of XPF-ERCC1 crucial for efficient DNA repair.
We used a polycistronic lentiviral vector (hSTEMCCA-loxP) encoding OCT4, SOX2, KLF4, and cMYC genes and containing loxP sites, excisible by Cre recombinase, to reprogram patient-specific fetal cells derived from prenatal diagnosis for several genetic disorders, such as myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1), Beta-thalassemia (Beta-Thal), lymphedema-distichiasis syndrome (LDS), spinal muscular atrophy (SMA), cystic fibrosis (CF), as well as from wild-type (WT) fetal cells.
Twelve CpG loci (11 genes) showed greater than 10% comparative difference in DNA methylation, including hyper-methylated loci of FAM181A, MRI1, PIWIL1, CHFR, DEFA1, MRPL28, AURKA, and hypo-methylated loci of NALP1L5, MAP8KIP3, ACAT2, and PM20D1 in maternal asthma.
Systemic expression of DEFA1,1B,3,4,CTSG and ELA2 was significantly higher in the neutrophilic asthma (NA) phenotype.
The objective of this study was to determine the combined influence of alpha thalassemia, fetal hemoglobin, and the UGT1A1 polymorphism on serum bilirubin levels and cholelithiasis in patients with sickle cell disease.
The present study investigated the role of several genetic factors (UGT1A1 promoter (TA)n repeat polymorphism, alpha-globin status), hematological parameters, clinical severity, and hydroxyurea (HU) therapy on the occurrence of cholelithiasis in SCD.
We confirmed that alpha-thalassemia and low basal reticulocyte (RET) count were independent protective factors for cholelithiasis while 7/7, 8/8 and 7/8 UGT1A1 (TA)n genotypes were independent predisposing factors for this complication.
We explored the potential relationship between steady state serum bilirubin levels and the incidence of cholelithiasis in the context of UGT1A1 gene A(TA)nTAA promoter polymorphism in Omani sickle cell anemia (SCA) patients, homozygotes for African (Benin and Bantu) and Arab-Indian Beta(S) haplotypes, but sharing the same microgeographical environment and comparable life style factors.
Thus, not cholelithiasis but total serum bilirubin was influenced by UGT1A1 polymorphism in this SCA cohort.
Altogether our data provide the implication of UGT1A1 and SLCO1A2 in sickle cell anemia-related cholelithiasis.
Present study was aimed to explore the effect of (TA)n UGT1A1 gene promoter polymorphism on bilirubin metabolism, bilirubinaemia, predisposition to cholelithiasis and subsequent cholecystectomy, in Sickle-Cell Anemia (SCA) and beta-Thalasemia major (bTH) in Kuwaiti subjects compared to other population.
Our results confirm UGT1A1 (TA)7 allele as one of the factors accounting for the hyperbilirubinemia and cholelithiasis observed in SCA and bTH.
We analyzed the polymorphism A(TA)nTAA at the UGT1A1 promoter and the relationships between the various A(TA)nTAA genotypes and alleles and bilirubin levels and occurrence of cholelithiasis.
We analyzed the polymorphism A(TA)&lt;formula&gt;_{n}&lt;/formula&gt; TAA at the UGT1A1 promoter and the relationships between the various A(TA)&lt;formula&gt;_{n}&lt;/formula&gt; TAA genotypes and alleles and bilirubin levels and occurrence of cholelithiasis.
The ADP-ribosyltransferase 3 gene (ART3) has been reported to be associated with non-obstructive azoospermia (NOA) in the Japanese population.
A recent Japanese study provided evidence that the rs6836703: G&gt;A single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) from the ADP-ribosyltransferase 3 (ART3) gene is significantly associated with non-obstructive azoospermia.
The analysis of genes involved in hereditary spherocytosis, by next-generation sequencing in two patients with clinical diagnosis of the disease, showed the presence of the c.1795+1G&gt;A mutation in the SPTB gene.
Hereditary spherocytosis stems from mutations in one of the genes encoding ankyrin-1 (ANKI), alpha spectrin (SPTA1) and beta spectrin (SPTB), the anion exchanger 1 (SLC4A 1), and protein 4.2 (EPB42).
We also investigated methylation profiles in peripheral blood mononuclear cells from patients with red cell membrane diseases, such as complete protein 4.2 deficiency due to ELB42 mutations, hereditary spherocytosis with EPB3 mutations, and hereditary elliptocytosis with SPTB mutations.
The mutations of most cases of hereditary spherocytosis (HS) are located in the following genes: ANK1, SPTB, SLC4A1, EPB42 and SPTA1, which encode ankyrin, spectrin beta-chain, the anion exchanger 1 (band 3), protein 4.2 and spectrin alpha-chain, respectively.
Mutations in bone morphogenetic protein 1 (BMP1) in humans or deletion of BMP1 and related protease tolloid like 1 (TLL1) in mice lead to osteogenesis imperfecta (OI).
Mutations in the proteinase bone morphogenetic protein-1 (BMP1) were recently identified in patients with osteogenesis imperfecta, which can be associated with type 1 dentinogenesis imperfecta.
We previously showed these mice to have a skeletal phenotype that includes elements of osteogenesis imperfecta (OI), osteomalacia, and deficient osteocyte maturation, observations validated by the finding of BMP1 mutations in a subset of human patients with OI-like phenotypes.
Autosomal recessive osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) accounts for 10% of all OI cases, and, currently, mutations in 10 genes (CRTAP, LEPRE1, PPIB, SERPINH1, FKBP10, SERPINF1, SP7, BMP1, TMEM38B, and WNT1) are known to be responsible for this form of the disease.
Isolated 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase deficiency (3MCCD) is an autosomal recessive disorder of leucine metabolism biochemically characterized by accumulation of 3-methylcrotonylglycine (3MCG), 3-methylcrotonic acid (3MCA) and 3-hydroxyisovaleric acid.
Isolated 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase (MCC) deficiency is an autosomal recessive disorder of leucine metabolism caused by mutations in MCCC1 or MCCC2 encoding the Alfa and Beta subunit of MCC, respectively.
We performed mutational analysis in the four main HPE causing genes (SHH, SIX3, TGIF, and ZIC2) and GLI3, a gene associated with polydactyly as well as fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) to search for microdeletions in these genes and two candidate HPE genes (DISP1 and FOXA2).
Although the CCK-1 receptor has been shown to be highly expressed in resected human pancreatic cancer samples, its role is less clear.
The aim of this in vitro study was to investigate the CCK-1 receptor expression and the function of the CCK-CCK-1 receptor pathway in the human pancreatic adenocarcinoma cell line, Mia PaCa-2.
However, the main source of CCK receptors in the pancreatic tumor samples consisted of CCK2-expressing islets and/or CCK1-expressing nerves rather than neoplastic tissue.
These data indicate that the presence of CCK receptors in human ductal pancreatic tumor samples is mainly due to CCK2 expression in residual pancreatic islets and CCK1 in pancreatic nerves.
The aim of this study was to evaluate the association of the polymorphisms in TCN2 (rs1801198) gene and in MTRR (rs1801394) gene with nonsyndromic cleft lip and/or palate (NSCL/P) in a Brazilian population.
While the roles of the GluN2A and GluN2B subunit in ischemic stroke have been well developed, the role of the GluN2C subunit in ischemia is not well understood.
In the Western blotting assay, clonidine treatment led to significant up-regulation of the expression level of NR2B and Phospho-NR2B in the hippocampus of the rats when compared with the cerebral ischemia group.
In conclusion, clonidine could improve the learning and memory ability of rats with cerebral ischemia, and NR2B, ERK1/2, CREB, NF-KB were involved in this effect.
DWEYS-IgG cross-reactive with DNA and the N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor subunits GluN2A/GluN2B has been associated with neuropsychiatric systemic lupus erythematosus (NPSLE).
Therefore, NMDAR antagonists, especially NR2B-selective ones, combined with IGF-1 may serve as an alternative therapeutic agent for oxidative stress related neurodegenerative disease.
Taken together, our results demonstrated that LBP is neuroprotective against ischemic injury by its dual roles in activation of NR2A and inhibition of NR2B signaling pathways, which suggests that LBP may be a superior therapeutic candidate for targeting glutamate excitotoxicity for the treatment of ischemic stroke.
The obesity-induced changes in adipose tissue macrophage numbers are mainly due to increases in the triple-positive CD11b+ F4/80+ CD11c+ adipose tissue macrophage subpopulation.
Contrary to our hypothesis that obesity-mediated white AT inflammation is Nlrp3-dependent, we found that Western diet-induced expression of AT inflammatory markers (i.e., Cd68, Cd11c, Emr1, Itgam, Lgals, Il18, Mcp1, Tnf, Ccr2, Ccl5 mRNAs, and Mac-2 protein) were not accompanied by increased caspase-1 cleavage, a hallmark feature of NLRP3 inflammasome activation.
In current practice, an antibody cocktail comprising p63, CK903, and AMACR (PIN-4 cocktail) is frequently utilized to evaluate foci suspicious for prostatic adenocarcinoma.
Only 2 NA cases displayed an overall PIN-4 staining pattern compatible with prostate cancer.
Although heterogenous staining patterns were seen within individual cases, use of the PIN-4 cocktail effectively discriminates NA from prostate cancer because of the high frequency of coexpression of AMACR and CK903 within NA.
Kidney and prostate cancer tumor and benign biopsies were stained with hemotoxylin and eosin and prostate biopsies were subjected to PIN-4 immunohistochemistry.
A subset of biopsy sections was analyzed by IHC, and cancerous and non-cancerous regions could be readily visualized by PIN4 staining.
Elevated serum levels of Ang-2 and high values for the Ang-2/Ang-1 ratio may potentially be used as predictors of worst-case prognoses for P. vivax malaria, especially in patients with thrombocytopenia.
Dengue-associated thrombocytopenia and endothelial activation are associated with an imbalance in angiopoietin-2: angiopoietin-1 plasma levels.
It has been previously reported that mutations in retinal G protein coupled receptor (RGR) are associated with retinitis pigmentosa.
The present study aims to systemically analyze the potential role of variants of RGR in retinal diseases.
These data suggest that the recessive retinal disorder previously reported to be due to homozygous mutation in RGR is, at least in part, due to variants in CDHR1 and that the true consequences of RGR knock-out on human retinal structure and function are yet to be determined.
Rare mutations in the human RGR gene lead to autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa or dominantly inherited peripapillary choroidal atrophy.
In Western blot assays, the RGR-d protein was detected in retinas of a large proportion ( approximately 53%) of individual donors, including patients with age-related macular degeneration (AMD).
Mutations in the human gene encoding RGR are associated with retinitis pigmentosa.
In recognition of the clinical significance of AML MRD, the European LeukemiaNet (ELN) recently recommended the establishment of CR-MRDNegative as a separate category of treatment response.
The distribution according to the European LeukemiaNet (ELN) risk categorization from 2010 was 20% favorable, 31% intermediate-1, 28% intermediate-2, and 21% adverse.
Patients were stratified using the ELN European Leukemia Net classification.
oH(E)mT-DCN treatment also attenuated the expression of major ECM components, such as collagen I/III, elastin and fibronectin and induced tumor cell apoptosis, leading to extensive viral dispersion within orthotopic pancreatic tumors and pancreatic cancer patient-derived tumor spheroids.
In this study, we firstly examined neuroprotective effects of pre- or post-treatment with 15 and 30 mg/kg ATX against ischemic damage in the gerbil hippocampal cornus ammonis 1 (CA1) region subjected to 5 min of transient cerebral ischemia using cresyl violet staining, neuronal nuclei immunohistochemistry and Fluoro-J B histofluorescence staining.
Dysregulation of cysteinyl cathepsins and their inhibitors, cystatins (stefins), were implied in progression of tumorgenesis; nevertheless, their role in sinonasal inverted papilloma (IP) is still unrecognized.
Despite fundamental limitations applying to these models, such as the distinct immune system and the different metabolism regulating liver homeostasis in rodents when compared to humans, multiple approaches, such as surgery (bile duct ligation), chemical-induced (3,5-diethoxycarbonyl-1,4-dihydrocollidine, DDC, Alfa-naphthylisothiocyanate, ANIT), viral infections (Rhesus rotavirustype A, RRV-A), and genetic manipulation (Mdr2, Cftr, Pkd1, Pkd2, Prkcsh, Sec63, Pkhd1) have been developed.
Progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis type 3 (PFIC3) is an autosomal recessive disorder of cholestasis of hepatocellular origin, typically seen in infancy or childhood caused by a defect in the ABCB4 located on chromosome 7.
For example, mutations in ABCA1 cause Tangier disease associated with defective efflux of cholesterol and phosphatidylcholine from the plasma membrane to the lipid acceptor protein apoA1 (apolipoprotein AI), mutations in ABCA3 cause neonatal surfactant deficiency associated with a loss in secretion of the lipid pulmonary surfactants from lungs of newborns, mutations in ABCA4 cause Stargardt macular degeneration, a retinal degenerative disease linked to the reduced clearance of retinoid compounds from photoreceptor cells, mutations in ABCA12 cause harlequin and lamellar ichthyosis, skin diseases associated with defective lipid trafficking in keratinocytes, and mutations in ABCB4 and ABCG5/ABCG8 are responsible for progressive intrafamilial hepatic disease and sitosterolaemia associated with defective phospholipid and sterol transport respectively.
We further analyze two independent breast cancer datasets and find that specific isoforms of IGF2BP2, NECTIN4, ITGB6, and KLHDC9 are significantly associated with AZD6244, lapatinib, erlotinib, and paclitaxel, respectively.
RT-qPCR and Spearman's correlation analysis were then performed to measure IGF2BP2 mRNA expression in clinical glioma tissues and its correlation with miR-188 expression.
Finally, the biological roles of IGF2BP2 in glioma cells were assessed.
The present study identified IGF2BP2 as a direct target of miR-188 in glioma, and IGF2BP2 under-expression served tumour-suppressive roles in glioma growth and metastasis.
Thus, miR-188 had a similar role in glioma by inhibiting the action of its downstream target, IGF2BP2.
Background: Serum autoantibodies against tumor-associated antigens (TAAs) are detectable in early-stage gastric cancer patients; however, the time point during cancerogenesis when they appear in circulation is still obscure.Methods: In this study, we developed a recombinant antigen microarray and analyzed the prevalence of autoantibodies against 102 TAAs in 829 gastric cancer patients and 929 healthy controls from Caucasian and Asian populations, as well as 100 patients with chronic atrophic gastritis and 775 individuals staged according to different grades of intestinal metaplasia.Results: Six antigens, including CTAG1B/CTAG2, DDX53, IGF2BP2, TP53, and MAGEA3, were predominantly reacting with sera from gastric cancer patients when compared with healthy controls, and the seroreactivity was associated with intestinal-type gastric cancer, but not with patients' Helicobacter pylori status, grade, age, gender, or stage of gastric cancer.
The gene encoding the Insulin-like Growth Factor 2 mRNA binding protein 2/IMP2 is amplified and overexpressed in many human cancers, accompanied by a poorer prognosis.
Herein we show in a diverse array of human cancer cells that IMP2 overexpression stimulates and IMP2 elimination diminishes proliferation by 50-80%.
IMP2 stabilization of HMGA1 mRNA plus IMP2 stimulated IGF2 production synergistically drive cancer cell proliferation and account for IMP2's tumor promoting action.
In conclusion, miR-1193 suppressed proliferation and invasion of human breast cancer cells via translational suppression of IGF2BP2.
New genes HTRP5, CAPN6, STPK, 14-3-3PKR, and CALM1 and previously known genes including BTK, DDP, GLA, PLP, COL4A5, COL4A6, PAK3, and DCX are localized; candidate loci for other disorders for which genes have not yet been identified, including DFN-2, POF, megalocornea, and syndromic and nonsyndromic mental retardation, are also mapped in the region.
To study the expression status of Ras-association domain family 7 (RASSF7) and Ras-association domain family 8 (RASSF8) in nodular thyroid goiter (NTG), medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC), and papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) and establish whether a correlation exists between the presence of RASSF7 and RASSF8 proteins and clinicopathological parameters of the disease.
Moreover, HO-1 diminished ischemia-induced expression of MyoD involved in satellite cell differentiation in HO-1 KO mice.
Coprecipitation of CD36, CD9, and alpha6beta1 was also observed on platelets from a patient with Glanzmann thrombasthenia, indicating that alphaII(b)beta3 is not required for the other proteins to associate.
To rule out a cross-reactivity of the two polyclonal antibodies with GPIIb/IIIa, we studied PECAM1 and CD9 expression on the platelets from a patient with type I Glanzmann's thrombasthenia whose platelets are devoid of GPIIb/IIIa.
In contrast to TASK-1, which was not differentially expressed in lung cancer vs. normal lung tissue, we found the Na+-coupled nutrient transporters, SLC5A3, SLC5A6, and SLC38A1, transporters for myo-inositol, biotin and glutamine, respectively, to be significantly overexpressed in lung adenocarcinomas.
qPCR analysis showed elevated expression of efflux transporters (P-glycoprotein, multidrug resistant protein 2, breast cancer resistant protein) and influx transporters (folate receptor-Alfa, cationic and neutral amino acid transporter, sodium dependent multivitamin transporter) in a time dependent manner.
Immunoblot analysis further confirmed elevated expression of breast cancer resistant protein and sodium dependent multivitamin transporter.
All these studies demonstrated for the first time the functional and molecular expression of sodium dependent multivitamin transporter (SMVT), a specific carrier-mediated system for biotin uptake, in human derived breast cancer (T47D) cells.
The overall objective of this study was to investigate the differential expression of folate receptor-alpha (FR-Alfa), sodium-dependent multivitamin transporter (SMVT), and amino acid transporter [B ((0, +))] in retinoblastoma (Y-79) and retinal pigment epithelial (ARPE-19) cells.
This work demonstrated for the first time the higher expression and affinity of FR-Alfa, SMVT, and B ((0, +)) mRNA levels in retinoblastoma (Y-79) cells compared with retinal pigment epithelial (ARPE-19) cells.
To synthesize a novel camptothecin-poly(ethylene glycol) conjugate (CPT-PEG) which includes biotin as a moiety to enhance nonspecific and/or targeted uptake via the sodium-dependent multivitamin transporter (SMVT) and to evaluate its anticancer activity and apoptosis induction.
This suggests that the targeting approach utilizing transporters such as SMVT may substantially improve the delivery of CPT and its anticancer activity by enhancing cellular permeability and possibly retention of CPT.
We have cloned the human Na+-dependent multivitamin transporter (SMVT), which transports the water-soluble vitamins pantothenate, biotin, and lipoate, from a placental choriocarcinoma cell line (JAR).
While the association between IL-16 plasma levels and tumor progression has been reported for many types of cancer, the mechanism for IL-16 involvement has been partially elucidated for three of the cancer types, cutaneous T cell lymphoma (CTCL), multiple myeloma (MM), and breast cancer.
Nuclear translocation of pro-interleukin-16 was not observed in late stages of Sezary syndrome, indicating this loss is not reversible.
We propose that it is feasible to use plasma levels of IL-16 as a potential diagnostic marker of Sezary syndrome and to use loss of intracellular IL-16 as a prognostic indicator of disease severity and stage.
By reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction, interleukin-16 mRNA was detected in 18 of 18 mycosis fungoides lesions investigated.
Given the biologic properties of interleukin-16 and the parallel activation of the interleukin-2/CD25 pathway, interleukin-16 might be involved in the recruitment and stimulation of CD4+ lymphocytes in mycosis fungoides lesions and therefore contribute to the perpetuation of the associated cutaneous inflammation.
Three additional patients with possible parathyroid adenomas at 11C-choline PET/CT were ultimately found to have thyroid lesions on the basis of tissue diagnosis; however, none of these patients had abnormal calcium or parathyroid hormone levels.
Patients with primary hyperparathyroidism generally have a single parathyroid adenoma that causes excessive excretion of parathyroid hormone.
Although double adenomas are not yet widely acknowledged, presurgical imaging and nuclear scans can help to localize multiple lesions, and intraoperative parathyroid hormone assays can confirm the diagnosis and cure.
Finally, MMGP analysis revealed a positive correlation between the transcript levels of B7-H4 and proliferation-related genes including MKI67, CCNA1, and Myc in several patients with multiple myeloma.
The purpose of this study was to evaluate the expression of cyclin A1 mRNA in patients with myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and its clinical significance.
Cyclin A1 mRNA was detectable in 11 of 11 patients with acute myeloid leukemia, three of three patients with acute biphenotypic leukemia, eight of eight patients with myelodysplastic syndrome, 59 of 69 patients with chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) at diagnosis, 13 of 15 patients with CML in blastic transformation, 10 of 18 patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia, two of nine patients with essential thrombocythemia, and only two of 10 patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) with both cyclin A1 RT-PCR positive ALL leukemias being undifferentiated relapses.
Mice with ANP showed increased apoptosis of pancreatic acinar cells, pancreatic myeloperoxidase activity, serum lactate dehydrogenase activity, amylase, tumor necrosis factor-Alfa (TNF-Alfa), interleukin-6 (IL-6) levels as well as decreased serum IL-10 level, pancreatic expression of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1), sirtuin 1 (SIRT1) and p53, but the ratio of acetylated HSF1 and p53 was markedly increased.
These data suggest that resveratrol protects against L-arginine-induced ANP, which may be related to the enhancement of SIRT1-mediated deacetylation of p53 and HSF1.
The aim of this study was to explore the role of the p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (p38MAPK)/p53 signaling pathway in injury to the intestinal mucosal barrier during severe acute pancreatitis (SAP).
Furthermore, compared with homozygous missense mutations, compound heterozygous mutations appeared to have a more severe effect on phenotype, causing more severe growth retardation in ORC4 and more frequently pulmonary emphysema in CDT1.
We recently identified an RBP HNRNPL as a novel prostate cancer dependency via regulation of RNA splicing, suggesting the potential to target RBP or RBP-RNA interaction to treat cancer.
HNRNPL directly regulates the alternative splicing of a set of RNAs, including those encoding the androgen receptor, the key lineage-specific prostate cancer oncogene.
Collectively, our data reveal HNRNPL and its RNA clients as players in prostate cancer growth and potential therapeutic targets.
Heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein L (hnRNP-L) is a promoter of various kinds of cancers, but its actions in bladder cancer (BC) are unclear.
In this study, we examined the role of HnRNP-L in prostate cancer (Pca).
These results suggest a rationale for dose reduction of doxorubicin and docetaxel in prostate cancer therapy, since the doses needed to achieve 50% cell death may be decreased by approximately 4- to 15-fold or 3- to 8-fold, respectively, after a pre-treatment with ciprofloxacin.
This study investigated the presence of CA I and II autoantibodies in patients with iron deficiency anemia (IDA).
Compared with controls, CAIII concentration was lower in iron deficiency anemia (P&lt;0.01), but higher in beta-thalassemia anemia (P&lt;0.001).
The levels of erythrocyte carbonic anhydrase isozymes (CA-B and CA-C) were determined by a quantitative immunochemical technique in order to elucidate their clinical significances in patients with iron deficiency anemia.
1 The levels of erythrocyte CA-B per gram hemoglobin, CA-B per ml erythrocyte and CA-C per gram hemoglobin all increased but CA-C per ml erythrocyte did not increased in iron deficiency anemia.
The content of CA-B synthesized in lysates was much higher than that of CA-C. 6 In iron deficiency anemia, the increase of erythrocyte CA is speculated to be compensatory mechanism, which brought about the transportation of CO2 and right shifts of O2 dissociation curve.
Inhibition of inducible T-cell kinase (ITK), a nonreceptor tyrosine kinase, may represent a novel treatment for allergic asthma.
Here we show that Itk, a mediator of T cell receptor signalling required for Th2 immune responses and the development of asthma, is a positive regulator of Th9 differentiation.
Compared to wild-type mice, ITK knockout mice are resistant to asthma and exhibit reduced lung inflammation and decreased amounts of TH2-type cytokines in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid.
Unexpectedly, inhibition of the kinase activity of ITK during or after antigen rechallenge in an ovalbumin-induced mouse model of asthma failed to reduce airway hyperresponsiveness and inflammation.
Thus, our studies predict that inhibition of the kinase activity of ITK may not be therapeutic in patients with asthma.
FeNO levels were significantly elevated in the asthma compared to the control group (26 +/- 18 versus 11 +/- 4 ppb; p &lt; 0.05), and trended higher than levels in the tetraplegia group (15 +/- 6; p = 0.08).
The medicinal chemistry community has directed considerable efforts toward the discovery of selective inhibitors of interleukin-2 inducible T-cell kinase (ITK), given its role in T-cell signaling downstream of the T-cell receptor (TCR) and the implications of this target for inflammatory disorders such as asthma.
The caspase-3 apoptotic index was a strong risk factor for subsequent gestational trophoblastic neoplasia development.
The two genes were CXCL6 (chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 6) and BBS5 (Bardet-Biedl syndrome 5).
Compared with patients with a false-positive penicillin allergy result (confirmed by negative penicillin skin testing result), patients reporting a true penicillin allergy confirmed by positive penicillin skin test results tended to be more frequently men (61.5% versus 44.5%; Delta 17.0%; 95% CI -13.5% to 42%), black (69.2% versus 44.5%; Delta 24.7%; 95% CI -6.9% to 46.8%), and have no family history of drug allergy (7.7% versus 17.5%; Delta9.8%; 95% CI -20.9% to 20.4%), but self-reported other drug allergies more frequently (61.5% versus 38.7%; Delta 22.9%; 95% CI -7.7% to 47.5%).
We identified 12 biomarkers consistently associated with either clinical groups "upstream" towards culture-positive TB on the TB disease spectrum (CD14, FCGR1A, FPR1, MMP9, RAB24, SEC14L1, and TIMP2) or "downstream" towards a decreased likelihood of TB disease (BLR1, CD3E, CD8A, IL7R, and TGFBR2), suggesting a correlation with MTB-related pathology and high relevance to a future POC test for pediatric TB.
However, aberrant expression of class III Beta-tubulin has been observed in passaged RPE cells and RPE cells with dedifferentiated morphology in pathologic epiretinal membranes from idiopathic macular pucker, proliferative vitreoretinopathy (PVR) and proliferative diabetic retinopathy (PDR).
Disorders in the ability ofleukocytes to produce IFN-alpha and IFN-gamma were detected in patients with bronchial asthma and allergic rhinitis.
Factors underlying the 'exacerbation-prone' phenotype are incompletely understood but include extrinsic factors: cigarette smoking, medication non-compliance, psychosocial factors, and co-morbidities such as gastroesophageal reflux disease, rhinosinusitis, obesity, and intolerance to non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medications; as well as intrinsic factors such as deficient epithelial cell production of the anti-viral type I interferons (IFN-alpha and IFN-beta).
These data indicate that therapeutic strategies using SAHPs targeting CD36, but not necessarily mimicking all apolipoprotein A-I functions, may be considered a possible new treatment approach for inflammation-induced ALI and pulmonary edema.
The enhanced expression of IL-17 that is observed in patients with Crohn's disease could act on intestinal fibroblasts to induce expression of transcription factor NFKBIZ and proinflammatory chemokine CXCL1.
In the majority of cases, autosomal dominant nonsyndromic hearing loss is postlingual and progressive, with the exception of hearing impairment in families in which the impairment is linked to DFNA3, DFNA8/12, and DFNA24, the novel locus described in this report.
The morphological similarity and resemblance of keratin 1, 10, and 14 profiles, and p63 and Beta-catenin expression between mixed epidermal and inner root sheath hybrid cysts and keratoacanthomas suggests that hybrid cysts progressed to keratoacanthomas, and the cells from infundibular cells to inner root sheath cells of the pilar segment seem to be the origin of rat keratoacanthomas.
UCDs include a spectrum of enzyme deficiencies, namely n-acetylglutamate synthase deficiency (NAGS), carbamoyl phosphate synthetase I deficiency (CPS1), ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency (OTC), argininosuccinate lyase deficiency (ASL), citrullinemia type I (ASS1), and argininemia (ARG).
Recovery was also associated with maternal obesity, and there was some ethnic variation - in the adjusted analysis indigenous (Orang Asal) Malaysians had lower odds of recovery.
Argininosuccinic acid lyase (ASL) deficiency, caused by mutations in the ASL gene (OMIM: 608310) is a urea cycle disorder that has pleiotropic presentations.
These include N-acetylglutamate synthase deficiency (NAGSD); Carbamyl phosphate synthetase 1 deficiency (CPS1D); Ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency (OTCD); Argininosuccinate synthetase deficiency (ASSD) (Citrullinemia); Argininosuccinate lyase deficiency (ASLD) (Argininosuccinic aciduria); Arginase deficiency (ARGD, Argininemia); Hyperornithinemia, hyperammonemia, homocitrullinuria (HHH) syndrome (or mitochondrial ornithine transporter 1 deficiency [ORNT1D]); and Citrullinemia type II (mitochondrial aspartate/glutamate carrier deficiency [CITRIN]).
Cardiomyopathy [methylmalonic (MMA) and propionic aciduria (PA)], prolonged QTc interval (PA), optic nerve atrophy [MMA, isovaleric aciduria (IVA)], pancytopenia (PA), and macrocephaly [glutaric aciduria type 1 (GA1)] were exclusively found in OAD patients, whereas hepatic involvement was more frequent in UCD patients, in particular in argininosuccinate lyase (ASL) deficiency.
Fifteen patients (8 argininosuccinate lyase deficiency, 3 argininosuccinic acid synthetase deficiency, 3 ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency, 1 arginase deficiency) ages 2 months through 5 years enrolled in and completed the study.
The 20 genes with at least a 3-fold change, annotated with known phenotypic associations in the current gene databank (phenotype association, fold change) were aspartoacylase (Canavan disease, 9.96), growth hormone receptor (Laron dwarfism, idiopathic short stature, 8.25), lipoprotein lipase (familial chylomicronemia syndrome, lipoprotein lipase deficiency, 8.00), vitamin D (1,25- dihydroxyvitamin D3) receptor (involutional osteoporosis, vitamin D resistant rickets, 7.94), intercellular adhesion molecule 1 human rhinovirus receptor (cerebral malaria susceptibility, 7.16), peroxisomal membrane protein 3 35-kDa (Refsum disease, infantile form, Zellweger syndrome-3, 6.00), Bardet-Biedl syndrome 2 (Bardet-Biedl syndrome, 5.87), ribosomal protein S19 (Diamond Blackfan anemia, 5.85), apolipoprotein C-III (hypertriglyceridemia, 5.44), argininosuccinate lyase (argininosuccinicaciduria, 5.22), myosin VA (Griscelli syndrome-type pigmentary dilution with mental retardation, 4.92), lysozyme (renal amyloidosis, 4.17), SAM domain, SH3 domain and nuclear localisation signals 1 (Cherubism, 4.12 ), von Hippel-Lindau syndrome (hemangioblastoma, cerebellar, somatic, von Hippel-Lindau syndrome, 3.94), early-onset breast cancer 1 (BRCA1, papillary serous carcinoma of the peritoneum, 3.73), UDP-N-acetylglucosamine-2-epimerase/N-acetylmannosamine kinase (inclusion body myopathy, autosomal recessive, sialuria, 3.53), apolipoprotein A-I (amyloidosis, 3 or more types, hypoalphalipoproteinemia, 3.29), midline 1 Opitz/BBB syndrome (Opitz G syndrome, type I, 3.28), ATPase, Na+/K+ transporting, alpha 2 (+) polypeptide (familial hemiplegic migraine, 3.05).
Thirteen families were investigated, of which two were affected by N-acetylglutamate synthase deficiency, four by carbamoylphosphate synthetase 1 deficiency, one by ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency, three by argininosuccinate synthetase deficiency, two by argininosuccinate lyase deficiency, and one by arginase deficiency.
In this study, we examined the relationship between the lactic acid concentration and expression of LDHA and GLUT1, which are related to the Warburg effect, in human head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC).
We found that cetuximab downregulated lactate dehydrogenase A (LDH-A) and inhibited glycolysis in cetuximab-sensitive head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) cells in an HIF-1Alfa downregulation-dependent manner.
An Australian cohort of 252 unrelated familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy patients were screened for mutations in the Ca(2+) regulatory genes, sorcin (SRI), calstabin (FKBP1B), calsequestrin (CASQ2), phospholamban (PLN), sarcolipin (SLN), calreticulin (CALR3) and calmodulin (CALM).
The validated proteins contain the clinically used hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) biomarker alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) and the reported biomarker candidates Heat shock protein HSP 90-beta (HSP90), fatty acid-binding protein, epidermal (FABP5) and alcohol dehydrogenase 4 (ADH4), which demonstrated the robustness of the strategy.
In vivo, Hsp90Beta promoted VEGFRs and CD31 expression in human hepatocellular carcinoma tumor xenografts and was associated with increased tumor microvessel density.
In this study we report an apparent synergy between TGF-Beta1 and Hsp90Beta in stimulating migratory behaviour of colon cancer cells when signalling occurs via AlfavBeta6 integrin as opposed to the canonical TGF-Beta1 pathway.
Our findings indicate that the C allele of the novel colorectal cancer-associated variant rs2282151 is associated with increased expression levels of HSP90AB1, which is expressed higher in colorectal tumor tissues than in normal tissues.
Bortezomib induced internalization and degradation of c-KIT by binding c-KIT to Cbl, an E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase, and the subsequent release of Apaf-1, which was originally bound to the c-KIT-Hsp90Beta-Apaf-1 complex, induced primary apoptosis in GIST-T1 cells.
Both Annexin A1 and HSP90Beta were GlcNAcylated, and their protein expressions were elevated in colon cancer, compared to normal tissues.
Moreover, specific changes of GlcNAc abundances in Annexin A1 and HSP90Beta suggested that tumor-specific glycan patterns could serve as candidate biomarkers of colon cancer for distinguishing cancer patients from healthy individuals.
In addition, the knockdown of PEPCK, which is the rate-limiting enzyme for gluconeogenesis, led to a reduction in glucose production in rat hepatoma H4IIEC3 cells.
We recently reported expression of the chemokine receptors CXC chemokine receptor 3 (CXCR3) and CC chemokine receptor 4 (CCR4) in adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma and showed a preferential expression of CCR4 and its association with an unfavorable outcome.
We present a review of the current knowledge on cellular metabolism in non-cancerous and cancerous thyroid tissues, focusing on the monocarboxylate transporters MCT1 and MCT4, and on a transporter of the outer mitochondrial membrane TOMM20.
Papillary thyroid cancer and FA thyrocytes had high staining for TOMM20 compared to NCT and nodular goiter (NG) (P &lt; 0.01).
Staining patterns of MCT1 and TOMM20 in 35 human thyroid samples (15 ATC, 12 papillary thyroid cancer [PTC], and eight non-cancerous thyroid) and nine ATC mouse orthotopic xenografts were assessed by visual and Aperio digital scoring.
TOMM20 is also highly expressed in both ATC and PTC compared to non-cancerous thyroid tissue (P&lt;.01 for both).
High MCT1 and TOMM20 expression is also found in ATC mouse xenograft tumors compared to non-cancerous thyroid tissue (P&lt;.001).
ATC has metabolic features that distinguish it from PTC and non-cancerous thyroid tissue, including high expression of MCT1 and TOMM20.
PTC has low expression of MCT1 and non-cancerous thyroid tissue has low expression of both MCT1 and TOMM20.
AM can induce a metastatic phenotype in prostate cancer cells through its action on TRPV2 calcium channels and is also capable of influencing localised levels of RANKL in the bone to favour tumourigenesis.
To determine the profiles of soluble cytokine receptors and cytokines, including mostly their ligands, in the vitreous humor of patients with B-cell vitreoretinal lymphoma (VRL) and uveitis.
In analyses in patients with VRL, elevation of sVEGFR1 and sVEGFR2 levels was more prominent in patients with systemic metastatic retinal lymphoma (SMRL) than in those with primary VRL/primary central nervous system lymphoma (PVRL/PCNSL).
For example in prostate cancer cells, the TRPV2 activation following lysophospholipid or adrenomedullin stimulation enhances the invasiveness of cancer cells; furthermore, the increased malignancy of castration-resistant prostate cancer cells was associated with enhanced TRPV2 expression, mainly in metastatic prostate cancer cells.
In this regard, bladder cancer tumors show loss or reduction of a short TRPV2 variant during cancer progression, with increased malignancy and invasiveness.
TRPV2 and TRPM7 expression levels and TRPV2 activator-induced intracellular Ca(2+) increases were significantly higher, whereas TRPV4 expression and TRPV4 activator-induced intracellular Ca(2+) increases were significantly lower in mouse bladder cancer (MBT-2) cells compared to normal mouse urothelial cells.
Increases in the expression of TRPV2 mRNA, immunoreactivity, and TRPV2 activator-induced intracellular Ca(2+) were also observed in T24 human bladder cancer cells.
These results suggested that TRPV2 and TRPM7 were functionally expressed in bladder cancer cells and served as negative regulators of bladder cancer cell proliferation, most likely to prevent excess mechanical stresses.
On the other hand, in prostate cancer cells, Ca2+-dependent activation of TRPV2 induced by lysophospholipids increases the invasion of tumor cells.
In addition, the progression of prostate cancer to the castration-resistant phenotype is characterized by de novo TRPV2 expression, with higher TRPV2 transcript levels in patients with metastatic cancer.
The aim of the present study was to investigate the effects of TRPV2 on the proliferation, migration and invasion of 5637 bladder cancer cells in vitro.
Rat TRPV2 cDNA was transfected into 5637 bladder cancer cells and changes in the behavior of the cells were detected.
It was observed that TRPV2 enhanced bladder cancer cell migration and invasion; however, it did not affect cell proliferation in vitro.
The results of this study suggest that TRPV2 channels are a potential therapeutic target for bladder carcinoma.
The Transient Receptor Potential channel TRPV2 is known to promote in prostate cancer cell migration and invasive phenotype and is correlated with the stage and grade of bladder cancer.
Initial studies showed that expression profile of some TRP channels, notably TRP melastatin 8 (TRPM8), TRP vanilloid 6 (TRPV6),TRP canonical (TRPC6) and TRPV2, is changing during the development and the progression of prostate cancer towards the hormone-refractory stages.
The expression of TRPV2 mRNA in bladder cancer cell lines (T24, a poorly differentiated UC cell line and RT4, a well-differentiated UC cell line) was analyzed using reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction.
Furthermore, the effects of resveratrol and Shh on human colorectal cancer HCT116 cells were in a dose- and time-dependent manner.
Furthermore, knockdown of PFTK1 suppressed the expression of Shh as well as Smo, Ptc, and Gli-1 in colon cancer cells.
Taken together, these results suggest that knockdown of PFTK1 inhibited the proliferation and invasion of colon cancer cells as well as the EMT progress by suppressing the Sonic hedgehog signaling pathway.
This case illustrates the potential severity of the renal anomalies in the BOR syndrome and the inadequacy of oligohydramnios and maternal serum alpha-fetoprotein as screening methods for renal agenesis.
Severe sepsis and antibiotic use were both associated with moderate thrombocytopenia, and proton pump inhibitor use was statistically significant in both univariate and multivariate analysis.
Thrombocytopenia is associated with poor prognosis, and the association between moderate thrombocytopenia and proton pump inhibitor use is relatively novel and should be validated in prospective studies.
We identified 12 biomarkers consistently associated with either clinical groups "upstream" towards culture-positive TB on the TB disease spectrum (CD14, FCGR1A, FPR1, MMP9, RAB24, SEC14L1, and TIMP2) or "downstream" towards a decreased likelihood of TB disease (BLR1, CD3E, CD8A, IL7R, and TGFBR2), suggesting a correlation with MTB-related pathology and high relevance to a future POC test for pediatric TB.
Western blot assay further confirmed that anti-ICAM-T0901317 liposomes inhibited retinoblastoma (Rb) phosphorylation and MCM6 expression.
Inhibition of MCM6 and MCM7 expression by nTZDpa and rosiglitazone paralleled their effect to inhibit phosphorylation of the retinoblastoma protein and cell proliferation.
Snord3A expression was also elevated in scrapie infected mice, but not in PrP(0/0) mice, indicating that while the expression levels of this transcript may reflect diverse prion etiologies, they are not related to the loss of PrP(C)'s function.
We hypothesize that in addition to its function as a disease marker, Snord3A may play an important role in the mechanism of prion disease manifestation and progression.
Her son has type 1 diabetes, arthritis, reduced IgG levels and IgA deficiency, but has not inherited the TNFRSF13B/TACI mutation.
Our results support the hypothesis that increased TACI expression on NOD B cells contributes to the pathogenesis of type 1 diabetes in the NOD mouse.
A family member with a wild type TACI variant had CVID-related phenotype including IgA deficiency and type 1 diabetes.
We mapped the loci contributing to the increased proportion of TACI(high) expressing splenic B cells and found that the control of TACI expression was strongly linked to chromosome 1, in a region which includes the insulin-dependent diabetes (Idd) 5 loci.
Our findings corroborate the notion that B cell deviations contribute to type 1 diabetes development, and suggest a temporal regulation of TACI(high) expression, possibly influenced by the ongoing autoimmune process.
Octamer-binding transcription factor 4 (OCT4) was closely related to pancreatic cancer progression, but its regulation in pancreatic cancer by microRNA (miRNA) is not fully clear.
This study was designed to investigate the expression of the T-box transcription factor 4 (TBX4), a tumor biomarker that was previously identified by proteomics, in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) and evaluate its clinical utility as a potential prognostic biomarkers for PDAC.
Whereas the pathological functions of LTB4/BLT1 axis in allergy, autoimmunity and cardiovascular disorders are well established; its role in cancer is only beginning to emerge.
Bioluminescence tomography (BLT) is a powerful non-invasive molecular imaging tool for in vivo studies of glioma in mice.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study that achieved such accurate BLT morphological reconstruction of orthotopic glioma without using any segmented tumor structure from any other structural imaging modalities as the prior for reconstruction guidance.
This enabled BLT more suitable and practical for in vivo imaging of orthotopic glioma mouse models.
The major objective of this study is to address this gap in our understanding of how IDO1 expression contributes to the biology of GBM, and whether its level of expression is a determinant of GBM patient outcome.Experimental Design: Patient-resected GBM, The Cancer Genome Atlas, human T-cell:GBM cocultures, as well as nu/nu, NOD-scid, and humanized (NSG-SGM3-BLT) mice-engrafted human GBM form the basis of our investigation.Results:In situ hybridization for IDO1 revealed transcript expression throughout patient-resected GBM, whereas immunohistochemical IDO1 positivity was highly variable.
Together with CT, BLT can provide precision radiation guidance and robust tumor volume assessment in small animal cancer research.
Variation of detected bioluminescence signals emitted from molecular cancer cells was depicted on BLT images.
Multispectral BLT images elaborated on early detection of cancer cells, characteristics of tumor growth, and metastasis for more accurate determination of internal bioluminescent sources.
Registration of BLT with CT images guided molecular cancer cells on anatomical coordinates.
The BLT imaging was a useful tool to localize cancer cells and to quantify radiation response.
Application of BLT led to more accurate definition of tumor volumes including molecular probe-based microscopic cancer cells.
Thus, in this report, we not only provide a novel strategy to expand super-charged NK cells, but also demonstrate that rapid and sustained expansion of residual T cells within the purified NK cells during expansion with DCs or OCs could be a potential mechanism by which the numbers and function of NK cells decline in cancer patients and in BLT-humanized mice.
Verrucous carcinoma (VC) is a variant of well-differentiated squamous cell carcinoma and in the anal region is regarded as synonymous with giant condyloma (Buschke-Loewenstein tumour) (BLT).
To test this idea, we infected migrating neural crest cells of chicken embryos with  replication-competent avian sarcoma virus expressing either FgfR2(C278F), a receptor mutation found in Crouzon syndrome or the ligand Fgf8.
These defects are similar in presentation to several human craniofacial disorders (e.g., craniosynostosis, hemifacial microsomia), and may be related to increased levels of bone metabolism observed in ace(ti282a)/fgf8 heterozygotes.
Since FGF8 maps to the same chromosomal region as FGFR2, has indeed been shown to be a ligand for FGFR2, and has an expression pattern consistent with limb and craniofacial anomalies, we have screened two kindreds with Pfeiffer syndrome that were previously linked to markers from 10q24-25 and a large number of individuals with craniosynostosis and limb anomalies for mutations in the coding sequence of FGF8.
The results demonstrated that rhTrx-1 significantly improved neurological functions and reduced cerebral infarction and apoptotic cell death at 24h after MCAO.
Treatment with Trx1 siRNA significantly increased mortality, behavioral deficits, and cerebral infarction volume and exacerbated neuronal cell apoptotic death after MCAO injury.
The results showed that intravenously administered rhTrx-1 (10 mg/kg) significantly improved neurological functions and reduced cerebral infarction and apoptotic cell death following cerebral ischemia.
Furthermore, the suppression on ONOO- formation by either rhTrx-1 or an ONOO- scavenger uric acid reduced cerebral infarct size in mice subjected to cerebral ischemia.
Proenkephalin (pro-ENK), a stable and reliable surrogate marker for unstable enkephalins, was found to be associated with acute kidney injury and chronic renal failure in previous studies.
PENK and NGAL concentrations were measured and GFR was estimated by using the isotope dilution mass spectrometry traceable-Modification of Diet in Renal Disease (MDRD) Study and three Chronic Kidney Disease Epidemiology Collaboration (CKD-EPI) equations: CKD-EPI(Cr), CDK-EPI(CysC), and CKD-EPI(Cr-CysC).
Proenkephalin cleavage products stored within cells, which included the 5.3-kDa peptide, could be released upon stimulation of cells with BaCl2 (2-fold above basal levels), 8-bromo-cAMP or CRF (7- and 8-fold above basal levels, respectively), and a mixture of BaCl2 and 8-bromo-cAMP (20-fold above basal levels).
Part 1 focuses on anti-metabotropic glutamate receptor 1-, anti-Homer protein homolog 3-, anti-Sj/inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor- and anti-carbonic anhydrase-related protein VIII-associated autoimmune cerebellar ataxia (ACA); part 2 covers anti-protein kinase C gamma-, anti-glutamate receptor delta-2-, anti-Ca/RhoGTPase-activating protein 26- and anti-voltage-gated calcium channel-associated ACA; and part 3 reviews the current knowledge on anti-Tr/delta notch-like epidermal growth factor-related receptor-, anti-Nb/AP3B2-, anti-Yo/cerebellar degeneration-related protein 2- and Purkinje cell antibody 2-associated ACA, discusses differential diagnostic aspects and provides a summary and outlook.
Part 1 focuses on anti-metabotropic glutamate receptor 1-, anti-Homer protein homolog 3-, anti-Sj/inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor- and anti-carbonic anhydrase-related protein VIII-associated autoimmune cerebellar ataxia (ACA); part 2 covers anti-protein kinase C gamma-, anti-glutamate receptor delta-2-, anti-Ca/RhoGTPase-activating protein 26- and anti-voltage-gated calcium channel-associated ACA; and part 3 reviews the current knowledge on anti-Tr/delta notch-like epidermal growth factor-related receptor-, anti-Nb/AP3B2-, anti-Yo/cerebellar degeneration-related protein 2- and Purkinje cell antibody 2-associated ACA, discusses differential diagnostic aspects, and provides a summary and outlook.
Part 1 focuses on anti-metabotropic glutamate receptor 1-, anti-Homer protein homolog 3-, anti-Sj/inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor- and anti-carbonic anhydrase-related protein VIII-associated autoimmune cerebellar ataxia (ACA); part 2 covers anti-protein kinase C gamma-, anti-glutamate receptor delta-2-, anti-Ca/RhoGTPase-activating protein 26- and anti-voltage-gated calcium channel-associated ACA; and part 3 reviews the current knowledge on anti-Tr/delta notch-like epidermal growth factor-related receptor-, anti-Nb/AP3B2-, anti-Yo/cerebellar degeneration-related protein 2- and Purkinje cell antibody 2-associated ACA, discusses differential diagnostic aspects and provides a summary and outlook.
Lastly, a recent study identified delta/notch-like epidermal growth factor-related receptor (DNER) as the target antigen of Tr antibodies, a marker of cerebellar ataxia and Hodgkin's lymphoma.
Real-time quantitative PCR confirmed significantly increased expression of HAS2, CHSY1, and C4ST1 in the combined groups of CLE lesions (n = 8) compared to healthy controls (n = 4).
Thus, the increase in HA in CLE presumably results from upregulation of HAS2, whereas CHSY1 and C4ST1 appear to contribute to increased CS.
Through Part 4 of Maintenance of Certification for Family Physicians (MC-FP), American Board of Family Medicine (ABFM) diplomates participate in quality improvement (QI) modules for diabetes.
Family physicians participating in MC-FP implemented improvement projects and showed quality improvements in caring for patients with diabetes.
Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM) and Graves' disease (GD) are autoimmune endocrinopathies and associated with distinct HLA-DR and -DQ alleles as well as several tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha) and beta (TNF-beta) alleles.
Studies in Caucasians have suggested that the TNFB gene might be a susceptibility gene for Graves' disease.
To investigate further the role of TNFB in predisposition to Graves' disease, we determined whether the TNFB disease associations in the Chinese were similar to those in Caucasians.
We conclude that the TNFB associations with Graves' disease in the Hong Kong Chinese differ between the genders and from those described in Caucasians.
The TNFB gene is not a susceptibility gene for Graves' disease.
We show here a significant association of TNF beta polymorphisms with Graves' disease.
Although TNF beta polymorphisms are linked to A1B8DR3, these results suggest that they represent an additional susceptibility marker in Graves' disease.
Here, we summarize our findings of targeted SOX9 destruction by SCFFBW7 (Skp1/Cul1/F-box) in medulloblastoma and its potential for therapeutic intervention.
A point mutation in mouse Vps33a (Buff mouse) causes albinism and bleeding (Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome) because of abnormalities in the trafficking of melanosomes and platelets.
A mutation in the Vps33a gene causes Hermansky-Pudlak Syndrome (HPS)-like-symptoms in the buff (bf) mouse mutant.
Epicardial LGEs were identified in 10/13 and pericarditis in 6/13 RAH.
An RA relapse was observed after 7-40 days in 10/13 RAH with myopericarditis.
We found that LGI3 and its receptors, ADAM22 and ADAM23, were significantly downregulated in glioma tissues.
Analysis of expression microarray data of glioma cohorts demonstrated that low expression levels of LGI3, ADAM22 and ADAM23 were significantly associated with poor prognosis of glioma.
Rather, we observed that, in ADAM23-heterotypic environments, ADAM23-negative cells promote tumor growth and metastasis by enhancing the proliferation and invasion of adjacent A23-positive cells through the production of LGI4 (Leucine-rich Glioma Inactivated 4) and nitric oxide (NO).
The aim of the present study was to evaluate ADAM28 and Insulin Like Growth Factor Binding Protein-3 (IGFBP-3)) gene expression in colorectal carcinoma tissues with regard to the overweight or obese status of the patients using an oligonucleotide microarray technique.
The expression of cancer stem cell marker cluster of differentiation 271 (CD271) was determined in traditional two-dimensional (2D) and 3D cultures of C918 uveal melanoma cells by fluorescent immunocytochemistry.
The missense mutation (c.370G &gt; A) in the TGFBI gene and insert mutation (c.1456-1457ins GAT) in the KRT12 gene were identified in a 23-year-old male patient with concurrent KC and GCD.
This study investigated the TGFBI gene mutation types in outpatients clinically diagnosed with granular corneal dystrophy (GCD) prior to phototherapeutic keratectomy (PTK), also calculated the mutation rate of subjects with normal corneas, but positive family history.
To describe 2 unrelated families with multiple members demonstrating a less commonly recognized vortex pattern of corneal deposits confirmed to be granular corneal dystrophy type 1 (GCD1) after identification of the p.(Arg555Trp) mutation in the transforming growth factor Beta-induced gene (TGFBI).
Screening of TGFBI in both families revealed a heterozygous missense mutation [p.(Arg555Trp)] in exon 12, confirming the diagnosis of GCD1.
Although this pattern of dystrophic deposits is not recognized by clinicians as a typical phenotype of GCD1, it is consistent with the production of the majority of the TGFBI protein by the corneal epithelium.
In this study, patients with macular corneal dystrophy (MCD; n = 18), granular corneal dystrophy type 1 (GCD1; n = 12), and lattice corneal dystrophy type 1 (LCD1; n = 4), as well as 50 healthy controls, were subjected to clinical and genetic examinations.
Variations were analyzed with DNA sequencing in the coding region of CHST6 in patients with MCD and exons 4 and 12 in TGFBI in patients with LCD1 and GCD1.
The previously reported R555W mutation in TGFBI was detected in 12 patients with GCD1, and the R124C mutation in TGFBI was detected in four patients with LCD1.
We detected previously reported, well-known hot spot mutations in TGFBI in the patients with GCD1 and LCD1.
TGFBeta1-induced expression of transforming growth factor Beta-induced protein (TGFBIp) and extracellular matrix (ECM) genes plays a major role in the development of granular corneal dystrophy type 2 (GCD2: also called Avellino corneal dystrophy).
We examined the role of chromatin markers such as histone H3 lysine methylation (H3Kme) in TGFBeta1-induced TGFBIp and ECM gene expression in normal and GCD2-derived human corneal fibroblasts.
Transcription and extracellular-secretion levels of TGFBIp were high in normal cells compared with those in GCD2-derived cells and were related to H3K4me3 levels but not to DNA methylation over the TGFBI locus.
This study expands on our previous research investigating dystrophic stromal aggregates, with the aim of better elucidating the pathomechanism of two conditions arising from the most common TGFBI mutations: granular corneal dystrophy type 1 (GCD1; R555W) and lattice corneal dystrophy type 1 (LCD1; R124C).
Patient corneas with GCD1 and LCD1 were stained with hematoxylin and eosin and Congo red to visualize stromal nonamyloid and amyloid deposits, respectively.
An increase in the number of residues experiencing cleavage was observed in both GCD1 aggregates and LCD1 deposits.
The study reveals previously unknown differences between the protein composition of GCD1 and LCD1 aggregates, and confirms the presence of the HtrA1 protease in LCD1-amyloid aggregates.
GCD is a Category 1, Stromal, TGFBI-associated corneal dystrophy.
We show here that the Arg555Trp mutant of the fourth fasciclin 1 (FAS1-4) domain of the protein (TGFBIp/keratoepithelin/Betaig-h3), associated with granular corneal dystrophy type 1, is significantly less susceptible to proteolysis by thermolysin and trypsin than the WT domain.
MiR-139-5p has been reported to be overexpressed in many types of cancers, but its role in bladder cancer has not been elucidated yet.
Here, we report that miR-139-5p functions as a tumor suppressor in bladder cancer and inhibits the cancer stem cell self-renewal by targeting Bmi1 directly.
We found that miR-139-5p expression was significantly downregulated in the bladder cancer specimens compared with that in adjacent normal tissues.
In vitro, restoration of miR-139-5p expression significantly inhibited the proliferation of bladder cancer cells.
Stem cell-related proteins such as c-MYC, NANOG, OCT4, and KLF4 and signaling pathways such as Wnt signaling were suppressed by restoration of miR-139-5p in bladder cancer cells.
In addition, miR-139-5p expression also blocked self-renewal of bladder cancer stem cells by inhibiting Bmi1.
In summary, our study supports that miR-139-5p acts as a tumor suppressor in bladder cancer development and suppresses cancer stem cell property of bladder cancer.
Our study also suggests that miR-139-5p has the potential to be used as a therapeutic molecule for bladder cancer treatment.
We present a case with CblC disease and pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) as the main symptom.
CblC disease should be considered in the differential diagnosis of pulmonary hypertension.
Genetic association of rs678849 along with neuroimaging and biomarker phenotypes, parallel with the known involvements of the OPRD1 in drug abuse, provided additional support for targeting these receptors as potential therapeutic targets in both neurodegenerative diseases and neuropsychiactric disorders such as Alzheimer's disease.
Recently, a robust up-regulation of human natural killer-1 sulfotransferase (HNK-1ST) was found in several subsets of melanoma cells during RA-mediated differentiation.
Here, we show that HNK-1ST changed the glycosylation state and reduced the ligand binding activity of Alfa-dystroglycan (Alfa-DG) in RA-treated S91 melanoma cells, which contributed to an attenuation of cell migration.
Ten genes of importance for HNK-1 biosynthesis (B3GAT1, B3GAT2, and CHST10) or for the formation of perineuronal nets (TNR, BCAN, NCAN, HAPLN1, HAPLN2, HAPLN3, and HAPLN4) were investigated for potential involvement in schizophrenia (SCZ) susceptibility, by genotyping 104 tagSNPs in the Scandinavian Collaboration on Psychiatric Etiology sample (849 cases; 1602 control subjects).
We show that CHST10 is also regulated by RARgamma in a significant subset of human melanoma cells, and three-dimensional cell culture migration assays suggest that CHST10 functions as a suppressor of invasiveness, but not proliferation, in these cells.
Induction of CHST10 by RARgamma-activating retinoids may present a novel therapeutic strategy to inhibit invasiveness in a subset of melanoma patients.
No disease-associated mutations were detected in the candidate genes SEMA4C, CNGA3 or HNK1ST from within the region.
Most XLMTM patients develop severe muscle weakness leading to respiratory failure and death, typically within 2 years of age.
Mutations in the MTM1 gene cause X-linked myotubular myopathy (XLMTM), characterized by neonatal hypotonia and respiratory failure, and are responsible for a premature mortality in affected males.
X-linked myotubular myopathy (XLMTM) is a congenital neuromuscular disorder defined by severe hypotonia, respiratory failure and histopathologic changes in muscle biopsy.
Centronuclear (myotubular) myopathy (CNM) is congenital and produces various degrees of muscular weakness and associated complications such as respiratory failure.
Patients with XLMTM often have severe perinatal weakness that requires mechanical ventilation to prevent death from respiratory failure.
This review addresses hearing loss as it occurs and has been reported in Muenke syndrome as well as six additional FGFR related craniosynostosis syndromes (Apert syndrome, Pfeiffer syndrome, Crouzon syndrome, Beare-Stevenson syndrome, Crouzon syndrome with acanthosis nigricans, and Jackson-Weiss syndrome.
Our literature review revealed the following incidences of hearing loss in FGFR craniosynostoses: 61% in Muenke syndrome, 80% in Apert Syndrome, 92% in Pfeiffer syndrome, 74% in Crouzon syndrome, 68% in Jackson Weiss syndrome, 4% in Beare Stevenson syndrome and 14% in Crouzon syndrome with Acanthosis Nigricans.
This study reveals the pleiotropic effects of the FGFR2 Y394C mutation evidenced by cutis gyrata, acanthosis nigricans, and craniosynostosis and provides a useful model for investigating the molecular mechanisms of skin and skull development.
Some cases of congenital skeletal disorders with an FGFR2 mutation show skin phenotypes, including acne, cutis gyrata, and acanthosis nigricans.
Peripheral nerve and spinal cord injuries, along with other painful syndromes such as fibromyalgia, diabetic neuropathy, chemotherapeutic neuropathy, trigeminal neuralgia, complex regional pain syndrome, and/or irritable bowel syndrome, cause several neuroplasticity changes in the nervous system along its entire axis affecting the different neuronal nuclei.
Sortilin-related receptor with LDLR class A repeats (SORLA, SORL1, or LR11) is a genetic risk factor associated with Alzheimer's disease (AD).
A meta-analysis was performed to identify empirical data assessing the effects of a single nucleotide polymorphisms of sortilin-related receptor on Alzheimer's disease based on 14 studies involving 37941 cases and 49727 control studies.
Given these data, we provide crucial evidence to manifest that a significant relationship exists between SORL1 polymorphisms and the susceptibility of Alzheimer's disease.
Furthermore, a third SORL1 variant, c.5195G &gt; C, recently identified in a Swedish case control cohort included in the European Early-Onset Dementia (EU EOD) consortium study, was detected in two affected siblings in a third family with familial EOAD.
Thrombospondin-1 (TSP1) is a ligand for CD47 and TSP1-/- mice are protected from pulmonary hypertension (PH).
We further discuss therapeutic strategies for enhancing or inhibiting CD47 signaling and applications of such agents in preclinical models of ischemia and ischemia/reperfusion injuries, organ transplantation, pulmonary hypertension, radioprotection, and cancer.
In present study, anticancer activity of ethanol extract of Chinese propolis (EECP) at 25, 50, 100, and 200  my g/mL was explored by testing the cytotoxicity in MCF-7 (human breast cancer ER(+)) and MDA-MB-231 (human breast cancer ER(-)) cells.
We exposed human pancreatic cancer cell line MiaPaCa-2 (CRL-1420) to 34  my g/mL of LE for 24, 48, and 72 hours.
In addition, variations in JAG1 have been found to be associated with multiple types of cancer including breast cancer and adrenocortical carcinoma.
The role of the extract in pancreatic cancer treatment was associated with down-regulation of Notch-4 and Jagged-1 in Notch signaling pathway.
The patient was a 64-year-old man with situs inversus totalis who had previously undergone sigmoidectomy with regional lymphadenectomy for sigmoid colon cancer at age 62.
For the treatment of hepatic metastases from sigmoid colon cancer in a patient with situs inversus totalis, "left" hepatic lobectomy, partial hepatectomy, and radiofrequency ablation therapy were performed.
On day 25, pulmonary eosinophilia, airway hyperresponsiveness, mucus hypersecretion, inflammatory cytokines such as IL-4, -5 and -13 in BAL fluid, gene expression of inflammatory mediators such as 5-LOX, E-selectin, VCAM-1, CCL5, TNF-Alfa, AMCase, Ym2, YKL-40, Muc5ac, CCL2 and iNOS in animal lung tissues, and serum IgE were determined.
Our results show that tropical pulmonary eosinophilia mice exhibited increased levels of IL-4, IL-5, CCL5, and CCL11 in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid and lung parenchyma along with elevated titers of IgE and IgG subtypes in the serum.
A(2B) R deficiency resulted in a dramatic reduction on Th2-type airways responses with decreased pulmonary eosinophilia without augmenting neutrophilia, and decreased lung IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13 production.
Both isoforms caused pulmonary infiltration of lymphocytes and neutrophils, whereas mm IL-33 also caused pulmonary eosinophilia and goblet cell hyperplasia and increased expression of IL-4, IL-5, IL-13, IL-17, MCP-1, and KC.
Germline deficiency of the cell surface receptor chain ST2 abrogated the mm IL-33-induced Th2-associated effects (pulmonary eosinophilia, goblet cell hyperplasia, and increased IL-4 and IL-5), yet the lymphocytic infiltration induced by full-length mouse IL-33 or mm IL-33 was not fully abrogated by the absence of ST2.
OVA-challenged STAT6-/- mice had neither AHR nor pulmonary eosinophilia, but had increased expression of mRNA for TNF-Alfa, IFN-Gamma and IL-4.
GLP-1R agonists are used to treat diabetes and obesity, and a GLP-2R agonist is approved to treat short bowel syndrome.
RNA-seq analysis and quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) were performed to evaluate the presence of GLP-1R and GLP-2R in EAT and subcutaneous fat (SAT) obtained from 8 subjects with coronary artery disease and type 2 diabetes mellitus undergoing elective cardiac surgery.
Gastric tissue samples of non-obese patients (NOB, n=10) and obese patients without diabetes (OB, n=31) and with diabetes (OWD, n=12) were used to evaluate GLP2R expression and distribution.
This is the first evidence of increased GLP2R expression in chief cells of patients with severe obesity regardless of diabetes status.
We examined the importance of GLP-2 receptor (GLP-2R) signaling for glucose homeostasis in multiple models of metabolic stress, diabetes, and obesity.
Moreover, glucose homeostasis was comparable in Glp2r(-/-) and Glp2r(+/+) mice fed a high-fat diet for 5 months or after induction of streptozotocin-induced diabetes.
In a model of tubulointerstitial fibrosis induced by unilateral ureteral obstruction in mice, increased collagen I protein content and an almost complete disappearance of erythropoietin mRNA expression were observed in the ureteral ligated kidney with respect to the contralateral control.
In the present study, employing a mouse model of renal tubulointerstitial fibrosis induced by unilateral ureteral obstruction (UUO), we demonstrated that EPO markedly reduced the disruption of the tubular basement membrane (TBM) through attenuating the activation of tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) and matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP9), the major matrix proteolytic network in the obstructed kidney.
The MVs derived from untreated MSCs (MSC-MVs) or from MSCs incubated in different concentrations of EPO (1, 10, 100, and 500 IU/ml EPO-MVs) were used to treat renal injury of unilateral ureteral obstruction (UUO) in vivo, and transforming growth factor-Beta1 (TGF-Beta1)-induced fibrosis in a human renal proximal tubular epithelial (HK2) cell line in vitro.
Twenty-four male C57BL6 mice were randomly divided into four groups, each comprising six mice: (i) control group (Sh); (ii) unilateral ureteral obstruction (UUO) plus vehicle group (U+V); (#) UUO plus 300 U/kg body weight recombinant human (rh)EPO (U+E1) and (#) UUO plus 1,000 U/kg body weight rhEPO (U+E2).
The aim of this study is to show and compare the actions of Simvastatin (Simv) and Erythropoietin (Epo) in renal expression of nuclear factor kappa B (NFKB), transforming growth factor-Beta (TGF-Beta), basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF), platelet-derived growth factor B (PDGF-B), fibronectin and development of interstitial fibrosis in rats with unilateral ureteral obstruction (UUO).
In a novel mouse model, unilateral ureteral obstruction-induced inflammatory milieu activated NFKB and Smad signaling pathways in REPs, rapidly repressed the Epo-producing potential of REPs, and led to myofibroblast transformation of these cells.
Reversing the unilateral ureteral obstruction-induced inflammatory microenvironment restored the Epo-producing potential and the physiologic phenotype of REPs.
Secondary polycythemia with increased production of erythropoietin (EPO) is known to occur in kidney diseases such as hydronephrosis and cystic disease, but the mechanism remains unclear.
Decompartmentalized hemoglobin, arginase 1, asymmetric dimethylarginine, and adenine nucleotides are all products of hemolysis that promote vasomotor dysfunction, proliferative vasculopathy, and a multitude of clinical complications of pulmonary and systemic vasculopathy, including pulmonary hypertension, leg ulcers, priapism, chronic kidney disease, and large-artery ischemic stroke.
We report a patient with bilateral incyclotorsion, asymmetric facial palsy, monocular depression deficiency, and unilateral Type 3 Duane syndrome, along with contralateral anotia and a midline cleft palate.
The authors report a child with features of Cardiofacial syndrome with anotia and facial paralysis.
Thirty-three cases had microtia or anotia, and all instances of facial palsy were associated with auricular malformation.
A girl was born with anotia, facial palsy and cardiac malformations.
Freshly isolated LSECs, Kupffer cells (KCs), and stabilin-1- and stabilin-2-transfected human embryonic kidney cells were incubated with fluorescently labeled or radiolabeled oxLDLs [oxidized for 3 h (oxLDL(3)), 6 h, or 24 h (oxLDL(24))] to measure endocytosis.
Furthermore, pleiotrophin (PTN), an endogenous ligand of Ptprz, also induced gastritis specifically in Ptprz+/+ mice when administered orally.
We aimed to determine whether serum levels of Krebs von den Lungen-6 (KL-6) and surfactant protein-D (SP-D) correlate with SSc/MCTD-associated ILD activity.
Serum KL-6 correlated positively with diffusing capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide (DLCO) (% predicted) and disease extent on HRCT, and the changes in serum levels of KL-6 were significantly related to the changes in forced vital capacity (FVC) in SSc/MCTD-associated ILD.
Our study suggests that serum KL-6 can be a useful monitoring tool of SSc/MCTD-associated ILD activity.
The KL-6 levels did not differ significantly according to the connective tissue diseases in the diagnostic groups (systemic lupus erythematosus, Sjoegren's syndrome, rheumatoid arthritis, mixed connective tissue disease, scleroderma, polymyositis/ dermatomyositis).
To quantify and compare human mucin 1 (MUC1) protein and mRNA expression in tears and conjunctival epithelial cells collected from Sjogren's syndrome (SS), non-Sjogren's keratoconjunctivitus sicca (KCS) and non-dry eyed (NDE) control subjects.
We studied 21 patients referred for idiopathic short stature, 5 with clinically suspected hypochondroplasia and 4 with achondroplasia.
A series of 140 patients with short stature operated on for limb lengthening (80 had achondroplasia, 20 had hypochondroplasia, 20 had Turner syndrome, 10 had idiopathic short stature due to an undemonstrated cause, 5 regarded their stature as too short, and 5 had a psychopathic personality due to dysmorphophobia that had developed because of their short stature) was reviewed.
In the present study, we investigated whether the impairment of IRS-1-mediated insulin signaling contributes to neurite outgrowth and neuronal loss, both in mice fed a high-fat diet and in mouse neuroblastoma (Neuro2A) cells.
To investigate the changes caused by the inhibition of IRS-1-mediated insulin signaling in neuroblastoma cells, we performed Western blot analysis, reverse transcription-PCR, and immunochemical analysis.
miR-145 might act as a tumor suppressor in uveal melanoma, and downregulation of the target IRS-1 might be a potential mechanism.
Almost a decade ago, we reported the presence of nuclear IRS-1 in medulloblastoma clinical samples, which express viral oncoprotein, large T-antigen of human polyomavirus JC (JCV T-antigen).
More recently, nuclear IRS-1 was detected in breast cancer cells in association with estrogen receptor alpha (ERAlfa), and in JC virus negative medulloblastoma cells expressing estrogen receptor beta (ERBeta), further implicating nuclear IRS-1 in cellular transformation.
We have previously reported that ERBeta, which is highly expressed in medulloblastomas, translocates insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS-1) to the nucleus, and that nuclear IRS-1 binds to Rad51 and attenuates homologous recombination directed DNA repair (HRR).
