In this study, we investigated the expression of EG-VEGF in colorectal cancer, the relationship between its expression and clinicopathological factors, and the in vitro activity of EG-VEGF transfectants.
We determined expression levels of EG-VEGF in 113 advanced colorectal cancers resected in our hospital by quantitative PCR, and compared the expression levels and clinicopathological findings by multivariate analyses.
We speculate that, in colorectal cancers, the EG-VEGF gene functions as an important factor in angiogenesis in primary and metastatic lesions, and consider that it is useful as a novel prognostic factor.
The aim of the present study was to detect the correlation between the expression of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), angiopoietin 2 (Ang2), ephrinB2 and endocrine gland-derived vascular endothelial growth factor (EG-VEGF) and carcinogenesis or portal vein tumor thrombus (PVTT) formation in human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
A recent genome-wide association study (GWA) reported a significant association between single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) at the PCDH11X gene and late-onset Alzheimer's disease (LOAD).
Protocadherin 11X (Pcdh11X) has been suspected to be associated with Alzheimer's disease through participating in the metabolism of PP1Alfa and Beta-catenin or by altering the synaptic functions.
A recent genome-wide association study reported that a common single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP, rs5984894) in the gene encoding Pcdh11X was associated with susceptibility to late-onset Alzheimer's disease (LOAD) in Caucasians.
A recent genome-wide study on late-onset Alzheimer's disease identified a SNP (rs5984894) on Xq21.3 in the PCDH11X gene strongly associated with LOAD individuals of European descent from the United States.
By analyzing late-onset Alzheimer's disease (LOAD) in a genome-wide association study (313,504 SNPs, three series, 844 cases and 1,255 controls) and evaluating the 25 SNPs with the most significant allelic association in four additional series (1,547 cases and 1,209 controls), we identified a SNP (rs5984894) on Xq21.3 in PCDH11X that is strongly associated with LOAD in individuals of European descent from the United States.
In this study, we investigated the effect of Bim-1 siRNA on cell proliferation, cell cycle, cell apoptosis and migration of human esophageal carcinoma EC9706 cells, and explored its potential mechanisms.
In the present study, 4-mm samples of BIM (n=31) and CIM (n=9) were selected from esophagectomy specimens that had been resected for esophageal cancer.
Mechanistically, HCMV upregulated two specific cellular antiapoptotic proteins, myeloid leukemia sequence 1 (Mcl-1) and heat shock protein 27 (HSP27), to block the two proteolytic cleavages necessary for the formation of fully active caspase 3 and the subsequent initiation of apoptosis.
Heat shock protein 27 (HSP27) has been reported to promote the development of leukemia by protecting tumor cells from apoptosis through various mechanisms.
The present study investigated the effects of small hairpin (sh)RNA-mediated HSP27 knockdown on the anti-cancer effects of quercetin in U937 human leukemia cells.
Therefore, these findings collectively suggested that suppression of HSP27 expression amplified the anti-cancer effects of quercetin in U937 human leukemia cells, and that quercetin in combination with shHSP27 represents a promising therapeutic strategy for human leukemia.
Among these proteins, enolase, aldolase, HSP70 and sorcin were up-regulated in doxorubicin-resistant myelogenous leukemia cell line, whereas HSP27 was down-regulated.
However, the role of Hsp27 in the pathogenesis of pediatric acute             leukemia (AL) remains unknown.
In this study, we evaluated the expression levels             of Hsp27 in bone marrow samples from 94 children with newly diagnosed acute lymphoblastic             leukemia (ALL), acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and 5 leukemia cell lines.
Additionally,             we transfected a target-specific siRNA duplex against Hsp27 into leukemia cells,             and examined the chemosensitivity and cell apoptosis in the response to antitumor             drugs.
Hsp27 was abundantly expressed in newly diagnosed AML-M4/M5 bone marrow             mononuclear cells (BMMCs) and THP-1, OCI/AML-3 leukemia cell lines.
Knockdown of Hsp27 expression increased the chemosensitivity of             leukemia cells and the anticancer drug-induced apoptosis.
Therefore, Hsp27 may be exploited as a new target for enhancing the             efficacy of chemotherapeutic drugs against leukemia.
It was: xS-D-D-K-K-A-K-A-A-T-S-S-V-L-T-K-F-T-Q-N-Q-I-Q-E-M-K-E-A-F-T-M-I-D-Q-N-R -D-G-L- I-D-V-S-D-L-K-E-M-Y-S-N-L-G-T-A-P-Q-D-S-V-L-Q-A-M-V-K-E-A-P-Q-M-N-F-T-G- F-L-S-L- F-S-E-K-M-S-G-T-D-P-E-E-T-L-R-N-A-F-Q-M-F-D-S-D-N-T-G-Y-I-P-E-E-Y-M-K-D- L- L-E-N-M-G-D-N-F-S-K-D-E-V-R-Q-T-W-K-E-A-P-I-A-G-G-K-V-D-Y-N-A-F-V-S-K-I- K- G-K-E-Q-D-D-A.
Integrin alpha 8 (ITGA8) encodes the alpha 8 subunit of the integrin alpha8beta1 protein and has recently been suggested as a new candidate gene for Parkinson's disease, an age related neurodegenerative disease with unknown etiology.
Screen a Swedish case control material for rs7077361, a genetic variant in ITGA8, in order to investigate its possible implication in Parkinson's disease in Sweden.
Our results do not support the hypothesis of ITGA8 as a candidate gene for Parkinson's disease in Sweden.
CYFIP1 maps to the interval between proximal breakpoint 1 (BP1) and breakpoint 2 (BP2) of chromosomal 15q11-q13 deletions that are implicated in the Angelman (AS) and Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS).
We found copy number variants in PDE10A (phosphodiesterase 10A), CYFIP1 [cytoplasmic FMR1 (Fragile X mental retardation 1)-interacting protein 1], K(+) channel genes KCNE1 and KCNE2, the Down's syndrome critical region 1 gene RCAN1 (regulator of calcineurin 1), cell-recognition protein CHL1 (cell adhesion molecule with homology with L1CAM), the transcription factor SP4 (specificity protein 4) and histone deacetylase HDAC9, among others (see http://www.genes2cognition.org/SCZ-CNV).
We describe nine cases with a microdeletion at 15q11.2 between BP1-BP2, thus having a haploinsufficiency for TUBGCP5, NIPA1, NIPA2, and CYFIP1 without Prader-Willi/Angelman syndrome.
Altered expression of CYFIP1 is seen in other developmental disabilities, including 15q disorders, and haploinsufficiency of CYFIP1 in Type I PWS cases may be associated with age-related phenotypic effects.
Expression analysis of cultured human cells and brain tissues from PWS patients indicates that CYFIP1 and NIPA2 are biallelically expressed.
Four genes (NIPA1, NIPA2, CYFIP1, and GCP5) have been identified in the chromosomal region between breakpoints 1 and 2 and are implicated in compulsive behavior and lower intellectual ability observed in individuals with Prader-Willi syndrome with TI versus TII deletions.
Messenger RNA from NIPA1, NIPA2, CYFIP1, and GCP5 was reduced but detectable in the subjects with Prader-Willi syndrome with the TI deletion, supporting biallelic expression.
Therefore, we recruited 50 untreated house dust mite-sensitive allergic rhinitis patients and 29 non-atopic healthy individuals and performed comprehensive simultaneous flow cytometric analysis of mutual correlations between levels of CD14, CD16, CD163, CD206, CD124 (IL-4R), CD210 (IL-10R) and CD25, CD124, CD127 (IL-7R), CD210, ICOS expression on monocytes and CD4+ T cells, respectively.
We did not observe any statistically significant differences between healthy and diabetic children in mRNA expression for FoxP3, IL-7R (CD127), IL-8RA, IL-10RA, IL-12A, IL-2RA (CD25), IL-21, STAT1, STAT3, SOCS2, SOCS3, TGF-beta1-R1, TGF-beta-R2 and TBX-21 genes.
Expression of the Growth Hormone (GH)-stimulated gene Socs2 (Suppressor of Cytokine Signaling 2) is mediated by the transcription activator STAT5 (Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription 5) and the transcription repressor BCL6 (B-Cell Lymphoma 6).
Gene expression analysis revealed increased expression of MAPK1, AKT1, PRKCE, IL4R and DROSHA and decreased expression of CDKN1A/p21, SOCS2, CHEK1, RAD51, KLF4, BLIMP1 and IRF4 in follicular lymphoma.
miR-20a/b and miR-194 target CDKN1A and SOCS2 in follicular lymphoma, potentially contributing to tumor cell proliferation and survival.
Nuclear factors such as pregnane X receptor (PXR) and constitutive androstane receptor (CAR), as well as transporters and conjugation enzymes involved in the detoxification of lithocholic acid (LCA), also showed higher expression in SPF mice.
In this study, using transgenic mice bearing conditional expression of the activated constitutive androstane receptor (CAR), we demonstrate that activation of CAR is both necessary and sufficient to confer resistance to the hepatotoxicity of lithocholic acid (LCA).
These results support the conclusion that dental caries is highly affected by the activity of CA VI in saliva as well as by the salivary flow rate.
Eleven articles found a consistent association between salivary protein polymorphisms and risk of dental caries, for proteins related to antimicrobial activity (beta defensin 1 and lysozyme-like protein), pH control (carbonic anhydrase VI), and bacterial colonization/adhesion (lactotransferrin, mucin, and proline-rich protein Db).
The rs17032907 genetic variant and the haplotype (ACA) of CA VI may be associated with dental caries susceptibility.
The oral pathogenic bacterium involved in human dental caries formation Streptococcus mutans, encodes for two carbonic anhydrase (CA, EC 4.2.1.1) one belonging to the Alfa- and the other one to the Beta-class.
Streptococcus mutans, the oral pathogenic bacterium provoking dental caries formation, encodes for a Beta-class carbonic anhydrase (CA, EC 4.2.1.1), SmuCA.
We used mice lacking the CNTNAP2 gene, which has been implicated in autism, and achieved a temporally precise reduction in E:I balance in the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) either by optogenetically increasing the excitability of inhibitory parvalbumin (PV) neurons or decreasing the excitability of excitatory pyramidal neurons.
Post-mortem analyses have demonstrated a selective reduction in the expression of parvalbumin (PV) in GABAergic interneurons in the frontal rather than the sensory cortex of patients with neuropsychiatric disorders such as schizophrenia, autism spectrum disorders, and bipolar disorders.
Recent neuropathology studies in human brains indicate that several areas of the prefrontal cortex have decreased numbers of parvalbumin interneurons or decreased parvalbumin expression in Autism Spectrum disorders (ASD) [Hashemi, Ariza, Rogers, Noctor, &amp; Martinez-Cerdeno, 2017; Zikopoulos &amp; Barbas, ].
In view of the documented association between parvalbumin-expressing neurons and autism, the objective of the present study was to determine if parvalbumin gene expression is also altered in Purkinje neurons of the cerebellum.
Our hypothesis is that parvalbumin, a molecule that controls and coordinate many cellular brain functions, contributes to the excitatory/inhibitory imbalance in Autism.
We report that parvalbumin expression is depressed in Purkinje cells of the cerebellum in autism.
For children less than 32 weeks, FVL homozygosity may be associated with an increase in the risk of developing quadriplegia (OR 9.12, 95% CI 0.86-53.71).
In the myocardium activation of NFATc3 down-regulates the expression of voltage-gated K(+) (Kv) channels after myocardial infarction (MI).
Knockdown of NFAT4 suppresses mitochondrial fission and protects cardiomyocyte from apoptosis and myocardial infarction.
The expression pattern of WNT3A is consistent with BRG1 in colon cancer tissues and WNT3A expression was inhibited in BRG1 knockdown cells.
In this study, we demonstrate that BRG1 may contribute to colon cancer progression through upregulating WNT3A expression.
VM-positive colon cancer samples showed increased Wnt3a expression (p &lt; 0.001) and Beta-catenin nuclear expression (p &lt; 0.001) compared with the VM-negative samples.
In vitro, over-regulated Wnt3a expression in HT29 colon cancer cells promoted the capacity to form tube-like structures in the three-dimensional (3-D) culture together with increased expression of endothelial phenotype-associated proteins such as VEGFR2 and VE-cadherin.
However, the roles of Wnt3a, the representative canonical Wnt ligand, in EMT and colon cancer progression have not yet been fully explored.
The expression levels of Wnt3a and EMT-associated proteins (E-cadherin, vimentin, and Beta-catenin) were assessed by immunohistochemistry in human colon cancer tissues to evaluate the clinicopathological significance of Wnt3a, as well as the correlation between Wnt3a and EMT.
We then upregulated Wnt3a expression in HCT116 colon cancer cells, established a nude mouse xenograft model, detected the expression of EMT and Wnt/Beta-catenin signaling-associated proteins, and observed invasion and clone-initiating abilities.
In 203 human colon cancer tissue samples, Wnt3a protein overexpression was related to colon cancer histological differentiation (P = 0.004), clinical stage (P = 0.008), presence of metastasis and recurrence (P = 0.036), and survival time (P = 0.007) of colon cancer patients.
Wnt3a expression was associated with EMT and promoted colon cancer progression.
Disruption of 11-cis-RDHs causes a slowly developing cone dystrophy caused by inefficient cone pigment regeneration.
To evaluate the GH-releasing hormone (GH-RH)-induced response of GH in patients affected by hypothalamic amenorrhea.
The amenorrheic condition associated with reduced BMI changes the GH-RH--induced GH response in hypothalamic amenorrhea, supporting a GH and a IGF-I disregulation in weight-loss--related amenorrhea.
We report the case of a 17-year-old girl presenting short stature (height 149 cm, below the 3rd percentile), obesity (weight 83.5 kg, body mass index 37 kg/m2) and secondary amenorrhea, in whom endocrinological evaluation disclosed an absolute lack of GH responsiveness to both suprapituitary challenges and repetitive growth hormone releasing hormone administration together with failure of plasma gonadotropins and PRL, low under basal conditions, to rise in response to GnRH and insulin-hypoglycemia, respectively.
Common genes include Jagged 1 (Jag1), Tetraspanin 2 (Tspan2), neuroblastoma, suppression of tumourigenicity 1 (Nbl1) and N-myc downstream regulated gene 2 (Ndrg2).
While vincristine was effective against 1 out 4 neuroblastoma xenografts, TS-N-2, with 58.1% maximum inhibition rate, etoposide was assessed ineffective as a single agent in all of the 3 xenografts used.
The purpose of this study was to evaluate the correlation of somatostatin receptor-2 (SSTR2) expression with 68Ga-DOTA-TATE uptake and 177Lu-DOTA-TATE therapy in neuroblastoma (NB) xenograft models.
Neuroblastoma may be treated with molecular radiotherapy, 131I meta-Iodobenzylguanidine and 177Lu Lutetium DOTATATE, directed at distinct molecular targets: Noradrenaline Transporter Molecule (NAT) and Somatostatin Receptor (SSTR2), respectively.
Tissue bank samples of formalin fixed paraffin embedded neuroblastoma tissue from patients for whom clinical outcome data were available were sectioned and stained with haematoxylin and eosin, and monoclonal antibodies directed against NAT and SSTR2.
68Ga-DOTATATE PET/CT enables detection of meningioma tissue based on somatostatin receptor 2 expression.
Immunohistochemistry for the meningioma markers EMA and SSTR2A raised the possibility of intraosseous meningioma, as all 3 lesions were convincingly positive for epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) and 1 lesion was convincingly positive for the somatostatin receptor subtype 2A (SSTR2A); weak, questionable positivity for SSTR2 was present in the remaining 2 cases.
Somatostatine receptors subtype 2 (SSTR2) are regarded as a potential target in neuroblastoma (NB) for imaging and promising therapeutic approaches.
GaTATE PET was positive in a high proportion of patients with refractory neuroblastoma, correlating with SSTR 2 on IHC, with additional disease identified compared with MIBG imaging.
PET using the SSTR2 analog (68)Ga-DOTATATE has recently been introduced for imaging of meningiomas.
(68)Ga-DOTATATE uptake correlates with SSTR2 expression and offers high diagnostic accuracy to delineate meningioma from tumor-free tissue even in recurrent tumors after previous therapy.
We aimed to compare the frequency of perineurial marker expression in these two entities, and to determine whether somatostatin receptor 2 (SSTR2) and progesterone receptor (PR), both expressed frequently in meningiomas, are also expressed in perineuriomas.
All tumours were stained using five antibodies against antigens that are known to be expressed in perineuriomas or meningiomas: epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), claudin-1, GLUT-1 (glucose transporter-1), SSTR2, and PR.
Of the meningiomas, EMA was expressed in 59 of 61, claudin-1 in five of 63, GLUT-1 in 19 of 62, SSTR2 in 59 of 68, and PR in 44 of 62.
The SSTR2-positive/PR-positive phenotype was detected in 42 of 60 meningiomas, but in none of 20 perineuriomas.
SSTR2 and PR are highly sensitive and, in this context, specific meningioma markers.
We utilized inhibitors of cPLA2 alpha, COX-1/2 and 5-LO to determine the potential roles of these enzymes in development of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), an animal model of multiple sclerosis (MS).
This study aimed to better understand the role of miR-200a-3p and its correlation with HBx in HBV-induced hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
Further study suggested that lncRNA-PE downregulated miR-200a/b by repressing the primary transcript expression, enhanced ZEB1 expression, and promoted epithelial-mesenchymal transition of hepatocellular carcinoma cells.
All these data imply that lncRNA-PE might play an important role in hepatocellular carcinoma development via the miR-200a/b-ZEB1 pathway.
Herein, we found that hepatocellular carcinoma cells shed more microvesicles than normal hepatocytes and miR-200a were shown to inhibit the release of microvesicles in hepatocellular carcinoma cells.
Collectively, our findings indicate that miR-200a regulated the microvesicle biogenesis involved in the hepatocellular carcinoma progression.
Conclusions: These findings indicate that miR-200a regulates the proliferation, migration and invasion of HCC cells by targeting Foxa2, suggesting that miR-200a may function as a potential therapeutic molecular for the diagnosis and treatment of the liver cancer.
Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs)-activated by transforming growth factor beta (lncRNA-ATB) is known to be involved in the invasion of hepatocellular carcinoma by regulating target genes of miR-200a.
In this study, we determined that miR-200a was downregulated in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) tissues and cell lines, consistent with the results of our previous study.
Our data indicate that nine distinct genes associated with multiple sclerosis risk, Bach2, Il2ra, Irf8, Mertk, Odf3b, Plek, Rgs1, Slc30a7 and Thada, can be confirmed to be differentially regulated in pathogenic CD4(+) T cells.
Genetic polymorphisms within a single locus encoding the transcription factor BACH2 are associated with numerous autoimmune and allergic diseases including asthma, Crohn's disease, coeliac disease, vitiligo, multiple sclerosis and type 1 diabetes.
However, array-based copy number analysis and qPCR were used to detect a hemizygous deletion in the PACD linkage interval containing 4 genes encoding small leucine-rich proteoglycans (SLRPs): KERA, LUM, DCN, and EPYC.
The authors performed clinical evaluation of a previously unreported pedigree with PACD, light and electron microscopic examination of an excised corneal button, genomewide linkage analysis, fine mapping linkage and haplotype analysis, and screening of four candidate genes (KERA, LUM, DCN, and EPYC).
Emerging evidence indicates that elevated CD164 expression is associated with aggressive metastasis, advanced stages, and shorter overall survival in lung cancer.
However, no data are available regarding the clinical significance of CD164 expression in lung cancer.
Using tissue microarrays, we determine that CD164 expression is correlated with clinicopathological characteristics in human lung cancer.
Therefore, identification of CD164 as a cancer stem cell therapeutic marker may develop an effective therapy in patients with chemoresistant lung cancer.
Cluster of differentiation 164 (CD164), a sialomucin, has been demonstrated to be involved in the regulation of proliferation, apoptosis, adhesion and differentiation in multiple cancers.
However, the involvement of CD164 in human glioma proliferation and apoptosis remains unknown.
The aim of the present study was to investigate the expression and oncogenic function of CD164 in normal human astrocytes (NHA) and glioma cells in vitro and in vivo.
The results of the present study demonstrated that CD164 mRNA and protein levels were significantly increased in human glioma cell lines and tissue samples.
Knockdown of CD164 inhibited cell proliferation and promoted apoptosis of the U87 human glioma cell line in vitro and in vivo.
The results suggest that CD164 expression may have affected the proliferation and apoptosis of human glioma cells via the PTEN/phosphoinositide 3-kinase/AKT pathway, and may therefore present a potential target for the diagnosis and treatment of glioma.
We recently demonstrated the high expression of CD164 on CD4+ T cells from Sezary syndrome patients with a wide range of circulating tumor burdens.
Our results suggest that miR-124 function as a tumor suppressor miRNA and suppress tumor proliferation and aggression by directly targeting oncogenic CD164 signaling pathway in NSCLC.
In a cohort of patients with Sezary syndrome, CD164 expression on total CD4+ lymphocytes was significantly upregulated compared with healthy controls.
Increased expression of CD164 may be a promising diagnostic parameter and a potential target for a CD164-linked therapeutic approach in Sezary syndrome.
These results indicate that miR-219 suppresses the proliferation, migration and invasion of medulloblastoma cells by targeting CD164.
Despite the known engagement of the AFAP1-AS in several human diseases, its biological function in Hirschsprung disease (HSCR) remains elusive.
This prospective observational study included 47 patients (mean age 29 years, range 3-50) with different resistant generalized epilepsy syndromes: idiopathic generalized syndromes (IGE) 15 patients, (juvenile myoclonic epilepsy four, absence epilepsy four, myoclonic absence two, unclassified IGE five), progressive myoclonic epilepsy type 1 (PME1) four, severe myoclonic epilepsy of infancy (SMEI) three, borderline SMEI three, Lennox-Gastaut syndrome/secondary generalized epileptic encephalopties 23 patients.
The International League Against Epilepsy (ILAE) classification recognizes 2 forms of myoclonic epilepsy with a good prognosis: benign myoclonic epilepsy of infancy (BMEI) and juvenile myoclonic epilepsy (JME); recent studies confirm the efficacy of levetiracetam (LEV) in treating idiopathic generalized epilepsies (IGE) in patients with myoclonic seizures.
We evaluated 35 patients (21 female, mean age 24.7 years) with different types of generalised epilepsies (juvenile myoclonic epilepsy (JME), severe myoclonic epilepsy of infancy (SMEI), Lennox-Gastaut syndrome (LGS), myoclonic-astatic epilepsy (MAE), myoclonic absences (MA), benign myoclonic epilepsy in infancy (BMEI) and 4 patients had unspecified epileptic syndromes).
The electroclinical features suggested juvenile myoclonic epilepsy in 14 patients, progressive myoclonus epilepsy in three, progressive familial cerebellar ataxia with myoclonus in two, and severe myoclonic epilepsy of infancy in one.
In the idiopathic generalized epilepsies we consider the benign myoclonic epilepsy of infancy and its reflex variant, juvenile myoclonic epilepsy and palpebral myoclonias with absences.
Group 5 comprises the true myoclonic epilepsies, differentiating syndromes recognized as idiopathic--such as "Benign myoclonic epilepsy of infancy" and "Juvenile myoclonic epilepsy"--from those which are cryptogenic and carry a more cautious prognosis--as "Cryptogenic myoclonic and myoclonoastatic epilepsies" and "Severe myoclonic epilepsy of infancy".
Interaction studies also showed that CEP78 binds to FAM161A, another ciliary protein associated with retinal degeneration.
Altogether, our data strongly suggest that mutations in CEP78 cause a previously undescribed clinical entity of a ciliary nature characterized by blindness and deafness but clearly distinct from Usher syndrome, a condition for which visual impairment is due to retinitis pigmentosa.
Methods Eligible survivors had curable breast or colorectal cancer or melanoma, had completed treatment (not including endocrine therapy) 2 months to 5 years previously, were age &gt; 18 years, and had scores above the clinical cutoff on the FCR Inventory (FCRI) severity subscale at screening.
ConquerFear participants had clinically and statistically greater improvements than control participants from T0 to T1 on FCRI total ( P &lt; .001) and severity subscale scores ( P = .001), which were maintained at T2 ( P = .017 and P = .023, respectively) and, for FCRI total only, at T3 ( P = .018), and from T0 to T1 on three FCRI subscales (coping, psychological distress, and triggers) as well as in general anxiety, cancer-specific distress (total), and mental quality of life and metacognitions (total).
Differences in FCRI psychological distress and cancer-specific distress (total) remained significantly different at T3.
Ganoderic acid interacts and modulates the signaling network in IR, IGFR-1, IGFR-2, VEGFR-1, VEFGR-2, and EGFR in cancer signaling pathways.
Sixty-four patients with hematological tumors were selected and divided into the group complicated with bacterial infection (infection group, 33 cases) and the non-infection group (31 cases), the flow cytometry was be used to detect the related peripheral blood markers CD64 and CD14, the nCD64 IND and CD14 IND were calculated, and the peripheral blood WBC count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP) were determined at the same time.
The study objectives are to translate the FCRI in Dutch, and to explore the factor structure and the psychometric qualities of the Dutch translation of the Fear of Cancer Recurrence Inventory (FCRI-NL).
The Severity subscale (FCRI-SF-NL) may be a valuable screening tool for fear of cancer recurrence severity in clinical care.
FCI features, with single-tube 8-color combination using CD45, CD34, HAL-DR, CD11b, CD13, CD33, and CD117 and CD64, were compared for the 30 consecutive APL and 30 non-APL acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cases which morphologically mimicked an APL.
This study aimed to confirm the cultural equivalence, reliability, and validity of the Korean version of Fear of Cancer Recurrence Inventory (K-FCRI).
The psychometric property of the K-FCRI was then validated in 444 survivors from cancers at various sites.
The K-FCRI had significant correlations with the Korean version of Fear of Progression Questionnaire, European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer Quality of Life Questionnaire Version 3.0, Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale, and Fatigue Severity Score, supporting the good construct validity and psychometric properties of K-FCRI.
The K-FCRI was confirmed as a valid and reliable psychometric test for measuring FCR of Korean survivors from cancers at various sites.
Recently, CLPB deficiency has been shown to cause a genetic syndrome with cataracts, neutropenia, and 3-methylglutaconic aciduria.
CLPB deficiency should be considered in neonates with absence of voluntary movements, respiratory insufficiency and swallowing problems, especially if associated with 3-methylglutaconic aciduria, neutropenia and cataracts.
Mutations in CLPB, SERAC1, TAZ genes were identified in neonates with 3-methylglutaconic aciduria (3-MGA) as a discriminative feature.
Altogether, our study suggests that disruption of CLPB causes a novel form of neonatal encephalopathy associated with 3-methylglutaconic aciduria.
Taken together, mutations in CLPB define a syndrome with intellectual disability, congenital neutropenia, progressive brain atrophy, movement disorder, cataracts, and 3-methylglutaconic aciduria.
We conclude that accumulation of protein aggregates underlies the development of cataracts and nephrocalcinosis in CLPB deficiency, which is a novel genetic cause of 3-methylglutaconic aciduria.
We now propose that perturbation of the mitochondrial membranes by abnormal protein aggregates leads to 3-methylglutaconic aciduria in CLPB deficiency.
Here, we present mechanistic details about the Hsp100 chaperone inhibition by GdmCl using the Hsp104 homolog ClpB from Thermus thermophilus.
We present a crystal structure of ClpB NBD1 in complex with GdmCl and ADP, showing that the Gdm(+) ion binds specifically to the active site of NBD1.
One patient with nesidioblastosis had no response to secretin, indicating that the pathophysiology of this entity is distinct from that of other forms of islet hyperplasia.
In addition, the ability to respond to secretin appears to be lost in patients with single insulinomas and nesidioblastosis, but not in those with multiple B-cell adenomas and hyperplasia.
In addition, HLXB9 is recurrently rearranged in young children with acute myeloid leukemia characterized by a chromosomal translocation t(7;12)-HLXB9/TEL and concomitant high expression of the unrearranged, wild-type HLXB9 allele.
Herein, we report the clinical course of an 8-month-old patient with acute myeloid leukemia, M2 subtype and with a HLXB9/TEL rearrangement.
Using RT-PCR, we screened members of the EHG family of homeobox genes, comprising EN1 (at 2q14), GBX2 (at 2q36), and EN2, GBX1, and HLXB9 (at 7q36), for dysregulation in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cell lines indicated by chromosomal breakpoints at these sites.
Previously, we showed that KLF5 is a mediator of RAS/MAPK and WNT signaling pathways under homeostatic conditions and that it promotes their tumorigenic functions during the development and progression of intestinal adenomas.
Moreover, production of lethal adenomas and carcinomas by specific expression of an oncogenic mutant of Beta-catenin in Lgr5(+) stem cells was suppressed completely by Klf5 deletion in the same cells.
Elevated levels of two particular Fbxw7 substrates, Klf5 and Tgif1, were found in normal intestine and adenomas of R482Q/+, R482Q/R482Q and Fbxw7(-/-) mice, but not Fbxw7(+/-) animals.
Here we investigated the in vivo effect of Klf5 heterozygosity on the propensity of ApcMin/KRASV12 double transgenic mice to develop intestinal tumors.
To determine whether KLF5 contributes to intestinal adenoma formation, we examined tumor burdens in Apc(Min/+) mice and Apc(Min/+)/Klf5(+/-) mice.
Compared with Apc(Min/+) mice, Apc(Min/+)/Klf5(+/-) mice had a 96% reduction in the number of intestinal adenomas.
Thus, KLF5 is necessary for the tumor-initiating activity of beta-catenin during intestinal adenoma formation in Apc(Min/+) mice, and reduced expression of KLF5 offsets the tumor-initiating activity of the Apc(Min) mutation by reducing the nuclear localization and activity of beta-catenin.
KLF5 expression was examined in intestinal tumors derived from transgenic mice expressing KRAS(V12G) under villin promoter and in human colorectal cancers with mutated KRAS.
In vivo, both intestinal tumors derived from mice transgenic for villin-KRAS(V12G) and human primary colorectal cancers with mutated KRAS contained high levels of KLF5 and increased staining of the proliferative marker Ki67.
Elevated levels of KLF5 protein are strongly correlated with activating KRAS mutations in intestinal tumors in vitro and in vivo.
Ras-transformation also markedly down-regulated KLF5; further analysis indicated that reduced expression of KLF5 mRNA and destabilization of KLF5 protein occur in intestinal tumors.
Reduced levels of KLF5 mRNA were also detected in APC(min) mouse and human familial adenomatous polyposis adenomas compared with normal crypt epithelium, indicating that down-regulation of KLF5 is an early event in intestinal tumorigenesis in vivo.
Collectively, these data indicate that intestinal tumor progression is associated with a change in the growth-related functions of KLF5 and that intestinal tumors down-regulate KLF5 expression by multiple mechanisms.
Variable major lipoprotein (Vmp) is a major tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-inducing component of Borrelia recurrentis, the agent of louse-borne relapsing fever.
Louse-borne relapsing fever, caused by Borrelia recurrentis, provides one of the best documented examples of the causative role of tumor necrosis factor (TNF) in the pathology of severe infection in humans.
Severe Jarisch Herxheimer reaction (J-HR) precipitated by antibiotic treatment of louse-borne relapsing fever (LBRF) is associated with a transient, marked rise in circulating tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNF alpha), interleukin 6 (IL-6) and interleukin 8 (IL-8).
In patients with louse-borne relapsing fever (Borrelia recurrentis infection), antimicrobial treatment is often followed by sudden fever, rigors, and persistent hypotension (Jarisch-Herxheimer reactions) that are associated with increases in plasma concentrations of tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha), interleukin-6, and interleukin-8.
Pretreatment with sheep anti-TNF-alpha Fab suppresses Jarisch-Herxheimer reactions that occur after penicillin treatment for louse-borne relapsing fever, reduces the associated increases in plasma concentrations of interleukin-6 and interleukin-8, and may be useful in other forms of sepsis.
A frail 84-year old lady with situs inversus totalis and symptomatic aortic stenosis underwent a successful transcatheter aortic valve implantation (TAVI) after extensive diagnostic work-up.
Here, we report the first known case of Marfan's syndrome, combined with situs inversus totalis with dextrocardia and discrete subaortic stenosis and aortic insufficiency in a 22-year-old woman.
Low-frequency artifacts that plague traditional TIE methods can be suppressed without an excessive number of captured images.
The FGF9 subfamily, including FGF9, FGF16, and FGF20, in addition to rhFGF16, rhFGF9, and rhFGF20, were shown to stimulate the proliferation and migration of HuH7 human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells.
FGF16 promoted proliferation and invasion behavior of SKOV-3 ovarian cancer cells, whose function may be similar in lung cancer.
This finding indicated possible involvement of FGF16 in ovarian cancer progression.
We observed that FGF16 stimulates the proliferation of human ovarian adenocarcinoma cells, SKOV-3 and OAW-42.
Taken together, our findings indicate that FGF16 in conjunction with Wnt pathway contributes to the cancer phenotype of ovarian cells and suggests that modulation of its expression in ovarian cells might be a promising therapeutic strategy for the treatment of invasive ovarian cancers.
Loss-of-function mutations in the UBR1 gene cause Johanson-Blizzard syndrome, which involves pancreatic exocrine insufficiency.
Johanson-Blizzard syndrome (JBS) is considered as an infrequent, but clinically easily recognizable autosomal recessive entity by the pathognomonic combination of congenital exocrine pancreatic insufficiency and hypoplastic alae nasi, in addition to other distinctive findings such as scalp defects, hypothyroidism, and rectourogenital malformations.
There are few reports of patients with JBS in association with facial clefting, referring all to types 2 to 6 of Tessier's classification that can be characterized properly as oblique facial clefts (OFCs).
We describe the clinical aspects in four patients with JBS and extensive OFCs.
In all of them, the diagnosis of JBS was confirmed by the demonstration of homozygous or compound-heterozygous mutations in the UBR1 gene.
Additionally, we review three previously reported cases of JBS with OFCs.
Taking into account a number of approximately 100 individuals affected by JBS that have been published in the literature we estimate that the frequency of OFCs in JBS is between 5% and 10%.
This report emphasizes that extensive OFCs may be the severe end of the spectrum of facial malformations occurring in JBS.
Johanson-Blizzard Syndrome (JBS) (MIM #243800) is a rare autosomal recessive genetic disorder characterized by exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, abnormal facial appearance and varying degrees of mental retardation.
Here, we report a 3 year-old mentally normal JBS girl.
With these findings, JBS diagnosis was established clinically.
Johanson-Blizzard syndrome (JBS) is a rare autosomal recessive syndrome characterized by dysmorphic nasal alae, ectodermal abnormalities, exocrine pancreatic insufficiency and early growth failure.
Nonsense, frame shift and splice-site mutations of the ubiquitin ligase gene (UBR1) lead to early loss of acinar cells in individuals with JBS.
This case illustrates that the phenotypic variability of pancreatic involvement in JBS may be subtle and may not manifest until the second decade of life.
Johanson-Blizzard syndrome (JBS) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder resulting from loss-of-function mutations in the UBR1 gene.
JBS can be easily recognized by its unique clinical presentation (including exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, hypoplasia/aplasia of the alae nasi, congenital scalp defects, sensorineural hearing loss, growth retardation, psychomotor retardation, and anal and genitourinary anomalies).
The objective of this study is to report on the first familial case of gender-discordant twins presenting JBS and a novel mutation in the UBR1 gene.
We also review literature describing molecularly confirmed cases of JBS.
Both patients presented typical clinical features of JBS.
Severe presentation of JBS usually involves deleterious (nonsense, frameshift, or splice-site) mutations in the UBR1 gene that are thought to completely abolish the expression of a functional protein product, as in this familial case; however, milder presentation of JBS has occasionally been observed with missense mutations in at least 1 of the 2 copies of UBR1, in which there may be residual activity of the product of this gene.
Johanson-Blizzard syndrome (JBS) is a rare, autosomal recessive disorder characterized by exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, typical facial features, dental anomalies, hypothyroidism, sensorineural hearing loss, scalp defects, urogenital and anorectal anomalies, short stature, and cognitive impairment of variable degree.
Mutation types include nonsense, frameshift, splice site, missense, and small in-frame deletions consistent with the hypothesis that loss of UBR1 protein function is the molecular basis of JBS.
The review of clinical data of a large number of molecularly confirmed JBS cases allows us to define minimal clinical criteria for the diagnosis of JBS.
Johanson-Blizzard syndrome (JBS) is a rare autosomal recessive disease characterized by exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, hypoplastic or aplastic nasal alae, cutis aplasia on the scalp, and other features including developmental delay, failure to thrive, hearing loss, mental retardation, hypothyroidism, dental abnormalities, and anomalies in cardiac and genitourinary systems.
We describe the case of a male infant with typical symptoms of JBS.
Johanson-Blizzard syndrome (JBS; OMIM 243800) is an autosomal recessive disorder that includes congenital exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, facial dysmorphism with the characteristic nasal wing hypoplasia, multiple malformations, and frequent mental retardation.
Our previous work has shown that JBS is caused by mutations in human UBR1, which encodes one of the E3 ubiquitin ligases of the N-end rule pathway.
Most JBS-causing alterations of UBR1 are nonsense, frameshift or splice-site mutations that abolish UBR1 activity.
We report here missense mutations of human UBR1 in patients with milder variants of JBS.
Taking advantage of this conservation, we constructed alleles of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae UBR1 that were counterparts of missense JBS-UBR1 alleles.
Among these yeast Ubr1 mutants, one of them (H160R) was inactive in yeast-based activity assays, the other one (Q1224E) had a detectable but weak activity, and the third one (V146L) exhibited a decreased but significant activity, in agreement with manifestations of JBS in the corresponding JBS patients.
These results, made possible by modeling defects of a human ubiquitin ligase in its yeast counterpart, verified and confirmed the relevance of specific missense UBR1 alleles to JBS, and suggested that a residual activity of a missense allele is causally associated with milder variants of JBS.
We report on a triplet pregnancy of consanguineous parents with one fetus being affected by recurrent Johanson-Blizzard syndrome (JBS).
In addition to the lack of exocrine acini as the characteristic feature of JBS, the pancreas revealed a resorptive inflammatory reaction with infiltration by eosinophilic granulocytes that focally dispersed onto islets of Langerhans, thus favoring a progressive destructive rather than primary dysplastic process and possibly explaining the occurrence of diabetes mellitus in later life.
JBS maps to chromosome 15q15-q21.1 and is associated with mutations in the UBR1 gene.
Johanson-Blizzard syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive multisystem disorder, it is characterized by the association of congenital exocrine pancreatic insufficiency and hypoplasia or aplasia of the nasal wings, and can be diagnosed by clinical characteristics and UBR1 gene analysis.
* Sixteen distinct haplotypes were detected from 258 individuals in the C. conica complex inferred from the cpDNA sequences of intergenic spacer (IGS) between atpB and rbcL, IGS between trnT and trnL, trnL intron, and IGS between trnL and trnF.
Maximum parsimony and Bayesian inference analyses of DNA sequence data of the plastid (the trnT-L igs, the trnL intron, two parts of the trnK intron, and the psbA-trnH igs) and nuclear genome (ITS1, 5.8S, and ITS2) showed these markers to be suitable to assess the species composition of sect.
However, the primers for amplification of chloroplast trnD-trnT intron and rRNA IGS failed to amplify the respective region in Elymus species.
New primer pairs were designed and successfully amplified the cpDNA trnD-trnT intron and rRNA IGS region in Elymus species.
In the present study, we investigated the effect of taspine derivative 12k on human colorectal cancer targeted at EphrinB2 and its PDZ.
In this study, we investigated the mechanism of chemoresistance and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in colorectal cancer involving the gain-of-function (GOF) mutant p53/ephrin-B2 signaling axis.
Twenty proteins from different signaling pathways (epidermal growth factor receptor [EGFR], phosphorylated extracellular signal regulated kinase [pERK], receptor for hyalouronic acid mediated motility [RHAMM], Raf-1 kinase inhibitor protein [RKIP], Beta-catenin, E-cadherin, phosphorylated AK transforming [pAKT], p16, p21, Ki-67, B-cell Lymphoma-2 [BCL2], vascular endothelial growth factor, apoptosis protease activating factor 1 [APAF-1], mucin1 [MUC1], ephrin B2 receptor [EphB2], matrix metalloproteinase 7 [MMP7], phosphorylated mothers against decapentaplegic 2 [pSMAD2], caudal type homeobox transcription factor 2 [CDX2], Laminin5Gamma2, and mammalian sterile 20-like kinase 1 [MST1]) involved in colorectal cancer progression were studied immunohistochemically on 220 well-characterized patients using a multiple-punch tissue microarray including 437 and 430 samples from the tumor center and the invasive front, respectively.
Abundant expression of IFN-Gamma-inducible protein 10 (IP-10) was observed on macrophages and in T cells in perimysial infiltrates of dermatomyositis (DM), and strong chemokine (C-X-C motif) receptor (CXCR)3 expression was observed on the majority of T cells in DM.
Abundant expression of IP-10 was observed on macrophages and T cells surrounding and invading non-necrotic muscle fibers in polymyositis and sporadic inclusion body myositis and in T cells in perimysial infiltrates of dermatomyositis.
DORs were colocalized in tissue slices and synaptosomes from the canine right atrium and SA node along with cholinergic and adrenergic markers, vesicular acetylcholine transporter (VAChT), and tyrosine hydroxylase (TH).
Furthermore, the lack of interdigital programmed cell death and associated syndactyly was related to down-regulated gene expression of Bmp2, Bmp7, Msx1, and Msx2, which are known to promote apoptosis in the interdigital mesenchyme.
In this context, ERdj3 suppression may eliminate the toxic gain of function associated with polymerization of ZAAT, thus providing a potential new therapeutic approach to the treatment of AATD-related liver disease.
The CPK, aldolase, GOT, GPT, and LDH concentrations in the serum and lumbar CSF of 80 patients with neuromuscular diseases and 20 controls were measured.
In 60 cases of various neuromuscular diseases, serum CA-III, CPK and aldolase were measured.
Together, our results show that P. gingivalis activates the ERK1/2-Ets1, p38/HSP27, and PAR2/NF-kB pathways to induce proMMP9 expression, after which the proenzyme is activated by gingipains to promote cellular invasion of OSCC cell lines.
Tissue sections ranging from normal mucosa to moderately-differentiated oral squamous cell carcinoma were studied using monoclonal antibodies against N-ras and ets-1 proteins.
In a randomized controlled trial of patients with dyslipidemia assigned to either extended release niacin (ERN) alone, ERN combined with the selective prostaglandin D2 receptor subtype 1 inhibitor laropiprant (ERN-L) or placebo, niacin lowered serum phosphorus; however, it is not known if it lowers FGF23 concentrations.
The use of nicotinic acid to treat dyslipidemia is limited by induction of a "flushing" response, mediated in part by the interaction of prostaglandin D(2) (PGD(2)) with its G-protein coupled receptor, DP1 (Ptgdr).
We performed a post hoc data analysis of serum phosphorus concentrations that had been determined serially (at baseline and weeks 4, 8, 12, 18, and 24) among 1547 patients who had dyslipidemia and were randomly assigned in a 3:2:1 ratio to treatment with extended release niacin (ERN; 1 g/d for 4 weeks and dose advanced to 2 g/d for 20 weeks) combined with the selective prostaglandin D2 receptor subtype 1 inhibitor laropiprant (L; n = 761), ERN alone (n = 518), or placebo (n = 268).
Apart from primary aldosteronism, mineralocorticoid excess can be caused by congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) due to mutations of the 11beta-hydroxylase and 17alpha-hydroxylase genes, by inactivating mutations of the glucocorticoid receptor gene (Chrousos syndrome), endogenous hypercortisolism (Cushing's syndrome), by mutations of the 11beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2 gene (apparent mineralocorticoid excess/AME) or licorice/carbenoxolone intake, mutations of the epithelial sodium channel genes (Liddle syndrome), mutations of the mineralocorticoid receptor gene (Geller syndrome), and by mutations in the WNK1, WNK4, KLHL3, CUL3 genes (pseudohypoaldosteronism type 2 or Gordon syndrome).
We provide an overview and diagnostic approach to apparent mineralocorticoid excess, glucocorticoid remediable aldosteronism, familial hyperaldosteronism type 2, Liddle's syndrome, Gordon's syndrome, activating mutations of the mineralocorticoid receptor, generalized glucocorticoid resistance and hypertensive forms of congenital adrenal hyperplasia.
As chronic pancreatitis (CP) is characterized by tissue infiltration of inflammatory cells, fibrosis, pancreatic neuritis and severe pain, the roles of fractalkine and CX3CR1 were investigated in CP (n=61) and normal pancreas (NP, n=21) by QRT-PCR, western blot and immunohistochemistry analyses.
Neuro-immunoreactivity for fractalkine and CX3CR1 was strongest in patients suffering from severe pain and pancreatic neuritis.
Our data suggest that CRISPR/Cas9-mediated NRL disruption in rods may be a promising treatment option for patients with retinitis pigmentosa.
The index patients were homozygotes for both a dominant mutation of the PABPN1 gene, (GCN)13, and a recessive mutation of the NRL gene, p.R31X, on chromosome 14q11.1, leading to early-onset OPMD accompanied by night blindness and reduced visual acuity.
Homozygosity for the recessive NRL mutation described here appears to be associated with a distinct retinal phenotype, demonstrating ERG characteristics similar to those of ESCS patients.
This report expands the spectrum of NRL recessive mutations, as well as the genetic spectrum of ESCS, and indicates a new syndrome of OPMD with an ESCS-like phenotype.
Blue light exposure of the R91W;Nrl(-/-) mouse could therefore be used to study molecular events preceding edema formation in a cone-rich environment, and thus potentially help to develop treatment strategies for edema-based complications in macular degenerations.
CXCL6 and CXCL2 enhanced angiogenesis by HUVECs when cultured with fibroblast cells and colon cancer cells (P &lt; 0.01).
After quality and quantity measurements, gene expression analysis of a colorectal cancer-specific marker set with 11 genes (CA7, COL12A1, CXCL1, CXCL2, CHI3L1, GREM1, IL1B, IL1RN, IL8, MMP3, SLC5A7) was performed with array real-time PCR using Transcriptor First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (Roche) and RealTime ready assays on LightCycler480 System (Roche).
These observations indicate a crucial role for TANs in the initiation and progression of CAC and suggest that the CXCL2-CXCR2 axis might be useful in reducing the risk of UC-associated colon cancer.
Gene expression analysis of a colorectal cancer-specific marker set (with 7 genes: COL12A1, CXCL1, CXCL2, GREM1, IL1B, IL8, SLC7A5) was performed with array real-time PCR using Transcriptor First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (Roche) and RealTime ready assays on LightCycler(R) 480 System (Roche).
It is approved for use in all indications for which reference etanercept is approved, including rheumatoid arthritis, juvenile idiopathic arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, non-radiographic axial spondyloarthritis, plaque psoriasis and paediatric plaque psoriasis.
We describe the case of a boy with a TUBA1A mutation presenting with microphthalmia and congenital cataracts in addition to microcephaly and severe brain malformation.
We previously showed that Decorin--a leucine-rich proteoglycan inhibiting the progression of glomerulonephritis and glomerular sclerosis--can be degraded by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway and deubiquitinated and stabilized by ubiquitin-specific processing protease 2-69(Usp2-69).
Here, we explored the effect of Usp2-69 on MC proliferation and ECM deposition by transfecting Usp2-69 plasmid into rat anti-Thy1.1 nephritis model and into cultured MCs, as well as detected Usp2-69 and Decorin in rat anti-Thy1.1 nephritis model by western blot.
Overexpressing Usp2-69 at the early stage, but not advanced stage, of anti-Thy1.1 nephritis alleviated cell proliferation and ECM deposition, which was shown by decreased Ki-67, Collagen IV and Fibronectin detected by immunohistochemistry.
In conclusion, our findings suggest that Usp2-69 overexpression alleviates the progression of rat anti-Thy1.1 nephritis and, therefore, that exogenous plasmid injection via the renal artery enhanced by electrotransfer technology could be a promising avenue for glomerular disease research.
The proportion of USP2-69 positive area in the glomeruli was 3.90% in normal kidney, 4.96% in minimal change disease, and 4.39% in membranous glomerulonephritides, while it was 14.84% in IgA nephropathy (IgAN) (mesangial proliferative type), 16.18% in lupus nephritis (LN; diffuse proliferative type) and 15.54% in acute proliferative glomerulonephritides (APGN); the difference of the percentages between IgAN, LN (IV subtype) and APGN and normal kidney were statistically significant (P &lt; 0.05).
We analysed surviving human SN DA neurons from patients with Parkinson's disease and from controls, and detected elevated messenger RNA levels of D2-autoreceptors and GIRK2 in Parkinson's disease.
Thus, our findings provide a novel homeostatic functional link in SN DA neurons between Cav1.3- L-type-Ca(2+) channels and D2-autoreceptor activity, controlled by NCS-1, and indicate that this adaptive signalling network (Cav1.3/NCS-1/D2/GIRK2) is also active in human SN DA neurons, and contributes to Parkinson's disease pathology.
In conclusion, sera from AIH-1 patients reacted with the amino acids in the sequence 33-37 (PQDGS) of the N-terminal of UGT1A6.
Several proapoptotic genes (AKT1 and AKT2) were down-regulated and antiapoptotic genes (APAF1 and BCL2L1) were up-regulated in multiple myeloma, both symptomatic and asymptomatic, compared to monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance.
To study the role of gene promoter hypermethylation of the putative tumour suppressor genes involved in the death-associated protein (DAP) kinase/p14/HDM2/p53/Apaf-1 apoptosis pathway in multiple myeloma (MM).
The other was a spermatocytic seminoma with focal primitive neuroectodermal differentiation: formation of Homer-Wright rosettes and perivascular pseudorosettes, with immunoreactivity for S-100 protein, neuron-specific enolase, synaptophysin, neurofilament-68 kDa, microtubule-associated protein 2, and vimentin.
In addition to Rett syndrome and breast/ovarian cancer observed in other studies, we report evidence for the first time, to our knowledge, that overexpression of ubiquinol-cytochrome c reductase core protein I might affect mitochondrial morphology and/or physiology and lead to development of obesity and related conditions.
From the therapeutic standpoint, colitis-associated cancers are associated with a lower prevalence of KRAS mutations than the sporadic variant.
In a murine acute systemic candidiasis model, C albicans strongly stimulated hepcidin, accompanied by a major reduction in transferrin saturation.
On the other hand, iron overload (iron saturated transferrin) is a serious risk factor for candidiasis in newborn and in leukemic patients.
It has been suggested that blockade of the Na+/H+ exchanger (NHE1) can prevent atrial fibrillation (AF)-induced electrical remodeling and the development of AF.
The case of a 13-year-old boy is presented and the diagnostic process discussed especially the differentiation between trance states and epilepsy.
The phenotype is usually T-B+NK+ SCID with lymphopenia where the clinical findings may be mild (CD3Gamma) or severe (CD3Delta, Epsilon, Zeta) owing to the underlying molecular defect.
In contrast, all reported human complete CD3delta (or CD3epsilon) deficiencies are in infants with life-threatening SCID and very severe alphabeta and gammadelta T lymphocytopenia.
Although clozapine, olanzapine, and other atypical antipsychotic drugs (APDs) have fewer extrapyramidal side effects, they have serious metabolic side effects such as substantial weight gain, intra-abdominal obesity, and type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Given that most patients with mental disorders face chronic, even life-long, treatment with APDs, the risks of weight gain/obesity and other metabolic symptoms are major considerations for APD maintenance treatment.
Although offering many benefits for several psychiatric disorders, antipsychotic drugs (APDs) as a class have a major liability in their tendency to promote adiposity, obesity, and metabolic dysregulation in an already metabolically vulnerable population.
To describe the association between obesity and the use of antipsychotic drugs (APDs) in adult outpatients followed-up on in five Primary Care settings.
Obesity was associated with the use of APDs [OR = 1.5 (CI: 1.3-1.8)], hypertension [OR = 2.4 (CI: 2.2-2.5)], diabetes [OR = 1.4 (CI: 1.3-1.5)] and dyslipidemia [OR = 1.3 (CI: 1.2-1.4)], p &lt; 0.0001 in all cases.
Obesity was associated with the use of APDs, regardless of the type of drug, and with the presence of hypertension, diabetes and dyslipidemia.
Higher DARs were associated with lower rates of moderate or severe paravalvular aortic regurgitation: DAR &lt;=10%, 17.6%; DAR 10% to 15%, 9.9%; DAR 15% to 20%, 6.3%; and DAR &gt;20%, 4.9%; P&lt;0.001.
In 1990, Hopkins and Ruiz-Riben stated that the target date o f the end o f 1995 for the eradication of dracunculiasis is unrealistic only if it is judged to be unimportant.
DLL1 influence drug resistance of small cell lung cancer through activating transcription of downstream genes HES1 and HEY1.
In this study, we showed that a high percentage of lung cancer lines expressed Jagged1, Notch receptors, and their transcriptional target genes (HES1, Hey1), suggesting that the Notch pathway plays an important role in lung cancer biology.
ALPs easily insert in the outer leaflet of the plasma membrane and cross the membrane via an ATP-dependent CDC50a-containing 'flippase' complex (in carcinoma cells), or are internalized by lipid raft-dependent endocytosis (in lymphoma/leukemic cells).
Levels of 27 transcripts were investigated as potential novel markers for prostate cancer, including genes encoding plasma membrane proteins (ADAM2, ELOVL5, MARCKSL1, RAMP1, TMEM30A, and TMEM66); secreted proteins (SPON2, TMEM30A, TMEM66, and truncated TMEFF2 (called POP4)); intracellular proteins (CAMK2N1, DHCR24, GLO1, NGFRAP1, PGK1, PSMA7, SBDS, and YWHAQ); and noncoding transcripts (POP1 (100 kb) from mRNA AK000023), POP2 (4 kb from mRNA AL832227), POP3 (50 kb from EST CFI40309), POP5 (intron of NCAM2, accession DO668384), POP6 (intron of FHIT), POP7 (intron of TNFAIP8), POP8 (intron of EFNA5), POP9 (intron of DSTN), POP10 (intron of ADAM2, accession DO668396), POP11 (87kb from EST BG194644), and POP12 (intron of EST BQ226050)).
Levels of CAMK2N1, GLO1, SDBS, and TMEM30A transcripts tended to be increased in primary prostate cancer from patients who later had biochemical failure.
Human CDC50A mRNA was expressed in embryonic stem (ES) cells, placenta, brain and chondrosarcoma, while CDC50B mRNA was expressed in pancreatic islet, kidney, prostate as well as in lung carcinoid, parathyroid tumor, bladder tumor, meningioma and pancreatic cancer.
Finally, ephrin-B2/Fc promoted angiogenesis in vivo in corneal neovascularization and Matrigel plug assays in adult mice, whereas LY294002 reduced angiogenesis in Matrigel that was induced by ephrin-B2/Fc.
Mutations of SYNGAP1 have been frequently linked to brain disorders including intellectual disability, autisms, and seizure.
Furthermore, the LTP-regulated phosphoproteins, which included the scaffold proteins Shank3, Syngap1, Dlgap1, and Dlg4, represented the "PSD risk" for schizophrenia and autism spectrum disorder, such that without these proteins in the analysis, the association with the PSD and these two psychiatric diseases was not present.
Developmental delay was the first manifestation of SYNGAP1-related encephalopathy; intellectual disability became progressively obvious and was associated with autistic behaviours in eight patients.
The only two genes upregulated across all transcriptome-wide PE analyses to date (microarray, RNA-Seq and PAS-Seq) are NRIP1 (RIP140), a transcriptional co-regulator linked to metabolic syndromes associated with obesity, and Flt1.
Furthermore, endothelial Flt1 gene deletion enhanced the effect of VEGFB, activating the thermogenic program in subcutaneous adipose tissue, which increased the basal metabolic rate, thus preventing diet-induced obesity and related metabolic complications.
(2016) demonstrate that VEGF-B, by displacing VEGF-A from VEGFR1 and activating VEGFR2, increases adipose tissue vascularity, improves insulin sensitivity, diminishes obesity, and alleviates metabolic syndrome.
Here, we hypothesized that increased activity of PlGF/VEGFR-1 signaling mediates obesity-induced tumor progression by augmenting tumor angiogenesis and TAM recruitment/activity.
Ablation of VEGFR-1 signaling prevented obesity-induced tumor progression and shifted the tumor immune environment toward an antitumor phenotype.
Targeting PlGF/VEGFR-1 signaling reprograms the tumor immune microenvironment and inhibits obesity-induced acceleration of tumor progression.
In a group of unmedicated patients with major depressive disorder matched for age with normal control group, we found a significant increase in 5-HT (100 microM)-induced accumulation of IP-1 (150 +/- 7% of basal for depressed patients, 132 +/- 3% for controls).
It is hoped that the same will happen in other MPN with specific genetic alterations: polycythemia vera (JAK2 V617F and other JAK2 mutations), essential thrombocythemia (JAK2V617F and MPL515 mutations), primary myelofibrosis (JAK2 V617F and MPL515 mutations), systemic mastocytosis (KITD816V and other KIT mutations) and stem cell leukaemia/lymphoma (ZNF198-FGFR1 and other FGFR1 fusion genes).
We show that stimulation of B-cells with the TLR9 ligands CpG-oligodeoxynucleotides (CpG-ODN) prevents spontaneous and irradiation-induced death of normal peripheral blood B-cells, and of B-cells from patients diagnosed with Common variable immunodeficiency (CVID).
Decreased IFN-Alfa secretion induced by TLR7/TLR8 activation was observed in CVID, which was recovered with TLR9 signaling.
Our findings revealed that TLR9 activation has an adjuvant effect on the altered type I response in CVID.
We activated purified CVID B-cells with surrogate T-dependent (anti-CD40), T-independent (TLR-9 ligand) stimuli or through B-cell receptor engagement (anti-IgM) with or without IL-21.
Moreover, studies at the single cell level showed that DCs from CVID patients and healthy controls produced similar amounts of interferon-Alfa or interleukin-12 and expressed similar levels of activation markers in response to human cytomegalovirus and ligands for TLR-7 and TLR-9.
In conclusion, it seems unlikely that CVID is secondary to insufficient production of naturally occurring DCs or a defect in their signalling through TLR-7 or TLR-9.
Given the established link between vitamin A deficiency and increased susceptibility to infections, we investigated the ability of the vitamin A metabolite all-trans retinoic acid (RA) to restore the defective immune responses in CVID-derived B cells activated through the TLRs TLR9 and RP105.
This can be explained by impaired RA-mediated isotype switching in TLR9/RP105-stimulated CVID-derived B cells owing to reduced induction of activation-induced deaminase.
The ability of RA to improve critical immune parameters in CVID-derived B cells stimulated through TLR9 and RP105 support the possibility of combining RA with TLR stimulation for the treatment of CVID.
The CD21(low) V(H)1-69(+) B cells of MC patients, like those of CVID and HIV patients, are anergic to BCR and TLR9 stimulation and display deregulation of several anergy-related genes; proliferative anergy is also observed in CD21(high) MZ-like V(H)1-69(+) B cells, that over-express the antiproliferative transcriptional repressor Stra13.
The secretion of glucagon by islet Alfa cells is normally suppressed by high blood glucose, but this suppressibility is impaired in patients with diabetes or cystic fibrosis (CF), a disease caused by mutations in the gene encoding CF transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR), a cyclic adenosine monophosphate-activated Cl- channel.
The results reveal that by potentiating KATP channels, CFTR acts as a glucose-sensing negative regulator of glucagon secretion in Alfa cells, a defect of which may contribute to glucose intolerance in CF and other types of diabetes.
Although Beta-cell dysfunction in cystic fibrosis (CF) leads to diabetes, the mechanism by which the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) channel influences islet insulin secretion remains debated.
Baseline estimated cost in 2008 for a hypothetical underweight, homozygous F508del-CFTR 6-year-old female without chronic Pseudomonas aeruginosa/Staphylococcus aureus, CF-related diabetes (CFRD) or methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA), and with a poor percent predicted forced expiratory volume in 1 s (ppFEV1) was Euro10,113, and was Euro21,082 in a 25-year-old with the same hypothetical profile.
The goal of this work was to evaluate renal function and the expression of megalin, cubilin, CFTR (cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator), and ClC-5 in the proximal tubule and renal cortex of rats with type 1 diabetes.
Mean values in lichen ruber planus were Zn 784 micrograms/l, RBP 5.26 mg/dl and Vit A 656 ng/ml; in leukoplakia Zn 696 micrograms/l, RBP 5.30 mg/dl and Vit A 652 ng/ml; and in OSCC Zn 659 micrograms/l, RBP 5.00 mg/dl and Vit A 617 ng/ml.
These observations indicate that HYA and PIIINP mainly reflect expansive synovitis proliferation while galectin-3 is more closely linked to autoimmunity, smoking and joint destructive processes.
In the entire UA cohort, galectin-3 correlated with the MRI bone marrow edema score, while PIIANP correlated with the MRI erosion score, and HYA with the synovitis and erosion scores.
Previous studies have reported overexpression of Galectin-3 in RA synovitis and increased levels in synovial fluid and serum in long-standing RA compared with osteoarthritis and healthy controls.
We defined by immunohistology the infiltrating cells and examined the in situ expression of plausible protagonists in synovitis of FMF: myeloperoxidase, lysozyme, galectin 1, galectin 3, p65 (RelA)/nuclear factor KB, inducible nitric-oxide synthase, cyclooxygenase 2, and cleaved caspase 3.
Only one of these, pFLJ2, was mobilized by the IncP plasmids RP4, pRK231 and R702, but not by plasmids pSa, R40a, R387, pN3 or R16.
Changes in the frequencies of genotypes and mutant alleles of ACE, AGTR1, AGT, and ITGB3 genes were analyzed in patients with arterial hypertension coupled with metabolic syndrome (N=15) and compared with population data and corresponding parameters in patients with isolated hypertension (N=15).
We examined associations between 15 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) across ITGB3 and five CVD-related traits in the Hutterites: plasma levels of high density lipoprotein-cholesterol (HDL-c), triglycerides (TG), low density lipoprotein-cholesterol (LDL-c), and lipoprotein(a) [Lp(a)] and blood pressure or hypertension.
The present study was performed to investigate the expressions of transforming growth factor Beta1 (TGF-Beta1) and matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) in an experimental model of tympanosclerosis and their possible roles in the formation of this disorder.
RT-PCR analysis showed that the overall transcriptional activity of the main HS biosynthesis-involved genes (EXT1, EXT2, NDST1, NDST2, GLCE, HS2ST1, HS3ST1, HS3ST2, HS6ST1, HS6ST2, SULF1, SULF2, HPSE) was decreased by 1.5-2-fold in Grade II-III glioma (p &lt; 0.01) and by 3-fold in Grade IV glioma (glioblastoma multiforme, GBM) (p &lt; 0.05), as compared with the para-tumourous tissue.
This study aimed to analyze the expression and function of HS6ST3 in breast cancer.
HS6ST3 was found up-regulated in T47D, MCF7 and MDA-MB231 breast cancer cell lines.
Silencing HS6ST3 diminished tumor cell growth, migration and invasion, but enhanced cell adhesion and apoptosis in breast cancer.
Gene microarray analysis revealed that silencing HS6ST3 significantly changed the expression of IGF1R and XAF1 in breast cancer cells.
Further functional studies showed that the cellular processes were mediated by IGF1R and XAF1 after silencing HS6ST3 in breast cancer cells.
Together these results indicate that HS6ST3 might be involved in the tumorigenesis of breast cancer and it could be a promising target in breast cancer therapy.
We aimed to examine the relationship between the preoperative GSA index [uptake ratio of the liver to the liver plus heart at 15 min (LHL15) to uptake ratio of the heart at 15 min to that at 3 min (HH15) ratio] calculated from 99mTc-labeled diethylene triamine pentaacetate-galactosyl human serum albumin (99mTc-GSA) scintigraphy and background liver fibrosis and to investigate whether the GSA index can be a useful predictor in hepatitis C virus (HCV)-related hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) patients treated with surgical resection (SR).
Here we demonstrate that HS 6-O-sulfotransferases 1 and 2 (HS6ST-1 and HS6ST-2), which perform sulfation at 6-O position in glucosamine in HS, impact ovarian cancer angiogenesis through the HS-dependent HB-EGF/EGFR axis that subsequently modulates the expression of multiple angiogenic cytokines.
Down-regulation of HS6ST-1 or HS6ST-2 in human ovarian cancer cell lines results in 30-50% reduction in glucosamine 6-O-sulfate levels in HS, impairing HB-EGF-dependent EGFR signaling and diminishing FGF2, IL-6, and IL-8 mRNA and protein levels in cancer cells.
Our results show that in addition to the critical role that 6-O-sulfate moieties play in angiogenic cytokine activation, HS 6-O-sulfation level, determined by the expression of HS6ST isoforms in ovarian cancer cells, is a major regulator of angiogenic program in ovarian cancer cells impacting HB-EGF signaling and subsequent expression of angiogenic cytokines by cancer cells.
We have investigated whether the expression of HS6STs and SULFs changes during chondrosarcoma progression and have determined 6O-sulphation levels in two chondrosarcoma cell lines.
Immunohistochemistry on tissue microarrays of chondrosarcomas showed that HS6ST3 and SULF1 were highly expressed in most chondrosarcomas, whereas SULF2 expression was absent in most cases.
HS6ST1 and HS6ST2 expression are significantly increased during chondrosarcoma progression, which suggest that 6O-sulphation is increased during progression.
In conclusion, our results show increased HS6ST1 and HS6ST2 expression during chondrosarcoma progression and increased HS 6O-sulphation in vitro.
As 6O-sulphation plays an important role in signal transduction, altered HS6ST expression might be associated with changes in signal transduction pathways in chondrosarcoma progression.
Thus, neutrophils and NK cells act as important disease-promoting immune cells in experimental osteoarthritis and their functional interaction is promoted by the CXCL10/CXCR3 axis.
Ovarian cancer cell line OC316 was reverse transfected with a miR-223 mimic and relative expression levels of miR-223 and SMARCD1 were quantified by RT-PCR; protein expression of SMARCD1 was evaluated by Western Blot.
miR-223 expression was upregulated in high grade ovarian serous carcinoma samples (median RQ=4.8881, P=.0045), whilst SMARCD1 was down-regulated (median RQ=0.5107, P=.0492).
It was indicated that SWI/SNF related, matrix associated, actin dependent regulator of chromatin, subfamily D, member 1, SWI/SNF related, matrix associated, actin dependent regulator of chromatin, subfamily D, member 1, dihydropyrimidinase-like 2, RMND5A and ANGPTL1 were potential prognostic markers in breast cancer, and the cell cycle may be involved in the regulation of breast cancer.
MiR-490-3p plays a tumour suppressor role in epithelial ovarian cancer by targeting CDK1 regulation and influencing SMARCD1 and cyclin D1 (CCND1) expressions.
Hepatocyte-specific inactivation of Baf60a reduced bile acid production and cholesterol absorption, and attenuated diet-induced hypercholesterolemia and atherosclerosis in mice.
miR-7 expression reduced SMARCD1 protein expression in lung cancer cell lines.
We found that although SMARCD1 sensitized lung cancer cells to chemotherapy drug-induced apoptosis, miR-7 enhanced the drug resistance potential of lung cancer cells against chemotherapy drugs.
SMARCD1 was down-regulated in patients with non-small cell lung cancer and lung adenocarcinoma cell lines, and SMARCD1 and miR-7 expression levels were negatively correlated in clinical samples.
Our investigation into the involvement of the EGFR-regulated microRNA pathway in the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex suggests that EGFR-mediated miR-7 suppresses the coupling of the chromatin remodeling factor SMARCD1 with p53, resulting in increased chemo-resistance of lung cancer cells.
miR-490-3p exerted growth- and metastasis-suppressive effects on gastric cancer cells through directly targeting SMARCD1, a SWItch/Sucrose NonFermentable (SWI/SNF) chromatin remodeling complex subunit.
Knockdown of SMARCD1 significantly attenuated the protumorigenic effects of miR-490-3p inhibitor, whereas enforced expression of SMARCD1 promoted in vitro and in vivo oncogenic phenotypes of gastric cancer cells.
SMARCD1 was markedly upregulated in gastric cancer in which its high expression was associated with shortened patients' survival independent of TNM staging.
iTD, nTD, and ECLNI were all significant independent adverse factors for RFS in rectal cancer, and were all associated with pT, pN, and LN ratio.
Silencing CCM3 by siRNA stimulated endothelial proliferation, migration and sprouting accompanied by significant downregulation of the core components of Notch signalling including DLL4, Notch4, HEY2 and HES1 and by activation of VEGF and Erk pathways.
The aim was to assess the efficacy of glucomannan (GNN) as a sole treatment for functional constipation.
Children aged 3-16 years with functional constipation according to Rome III criteria were randomly assigned to receive GNN (2.52 g/d) or placebo for 4 weeks.
Interestingly, using Affymetrix gene expression data of a cohort of 285 patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML), we found that GNN/TU12B1-TY expression was specifically increased in two AML clusters.
The present results indicate that reduced function of TU12B1-TY may contribute to the development and/or progression of human pancreatic cancer.
To characterize morphologic alterations in the retina of the visual mutant zebrafish gantenbein (gnn) and to examine whether these alterations correlate with those present in human hereditary eye diseases.
Thus, the early developmental morphology of gnn exhibits similarities to cone dystrophies most commonly seen in age-related macular degeneration (AMD) among humans, whereas the later stages of degeneration in gnn resemble RPE alterations in retinitis pigmentosa (RP) in humans.
The gnn zebrafish mutant may therefore be a useful model for examining the possible interplay and connection between cone dystrophy and RPE degeneration.
Our goal was to assess the patterns of familial aggregation of three melanoma risk factors: great number of naevi (GNN), light phototype (LP) and high degree of sun exposure (HDSE).
Twenty-five patients were divided into the following groups: (1) chronic glomerulonephritis with normal renal function (GNN) (2) chronic glomerulonephritis with moderate renal insufficiency (GNI) (3) severe chronic renal failure undergoing maintenance dialysis (CRF) (4) acute renal failure during oliguric phase (ARF) (5) normal control without renal suffering (NC).
The levels of PTH/PTHrP receptor mRNA (corrected by beta-actin mRNA) in the kidney of GNN, GNI, CRF and ARF patients was markedly decreased by up to 35.7%, 68.5%, 77.9% and 92.2%, respectively.
Here, we tested whether rhMG53 protein can improve membrane repair in a dysferlin-deficient mouse model of LGMD2B (B6.129-Dysftm1Kcam/J).
Three interacting partners of dysferlin are also implicated in membrane resealing: caveolin-3 (in limb girdle muscular dystrophy type 1C), annexin A1, and the newly identified protein mitsugumin 53 (MG53).
Latency and amplitude of the visual P300 and N270 were examined in patients with transient ischemic attack (TIA) and in age-matched healthy control subjects to investigate the feasibility of N270 as a clinical examination method to evaluate the cognitive status of patients with TIA.
We applied multichannel recording of P300 in 28 patients (68.3 +/- 8.1 years; 15 asymptomatic, 13 with a history of transient ischemic attack (TIA)) and compared them with an age- and sex-matched control group.
Previous studies have implicated the roles of NT and NTR1 in the etiology or expression of schizophrenia.
This case-control study examined the associations between schizophrenia and three NTR1 gene polymorphisms (rs6090453C/G, rs6011914C/G, and rs2427422A/G) previously linked to working memory performance in a Han Chinese population.
This suggested that nonpeptide agonist mimetics acting at the NTR1 might be helpful in the treatment of Parkinson's disease and schizophrenia.
The patients carrying either one or both of GCT and AGG alleles of SP-A2 and patients with A allele at position 1011 of MBL had markedly higher eosinophilia, total IgE antibodies and lower FEV1 (the clinical markers of ABPA).
The patients carrying either one or both of GCT and AGG alleles of SP-A2 and patients with A allele at position 1011 of MBL had markedly higher eosinophilia, total IgE antibodies and lower FEV1 (the clinical markers of ABPA).
sph1- and spa2-deleted cells possess defects in mating projection morphology and pseudohyphal growth.
sph1(Delta) spa2(Delta) double mutants also exhibit a strong haploid invasive growth defect and an exacerbated mating projection defect relative to either sph1(Delta) or spa2(Delta) single mutants.
SPH1, which is similar to SPA2, is required for bipolar budding and plays a role in shmoo formation.
Outcomes were best in patients with ovarian cancer (MS 15.9 months) and colorectal cancer (MS 14.3 months) and worst in patients with lung (MS 2.4 months) and pancreas (MS 1.9 months) cancers.
This study was undertaken to evaluate the effect of ADAM8 on the proliferation and apoptosis of hepatocytes and hepatoma carcinoma cells during hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) progression.
In conclusion, our study suggested that ADAM8 could promote the proliferation of normal hepatocytes and render hepatoma carcinoma cells more resistant to apoptosis to play important roles during the progression of HCC.
Thus, our data integrate ADAM8 in pancreatic cancer signalling and validate ADAM8 as a target for PDAC therapy.
This study focuses on investigating the concrete role of a disintegrin and metalloproteinase 8 (ADAM8) in the progression of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
However, no studies have examined ADAM8 association in colorectal cancer (CRC).
Subgroup analysis showed that 5-year OS of colon cancer, T3-T4 stage and N0 stage was worse for patients with ADAM8-positive tumors than those with ADAM8-negative tumors (p &lt; 0.05).
The 5-year DFS in colon cancer, T3-T4 stage, N0 stage, TNM stage II, adenocarcinoma, moderate differentiation and male patient subgroups was also worse for patients with ADAM8-positive tumors than those with ADAM8-negative tumors (p &lt; 0.05).
The aim of this study was to examine the role of the inflammatory cells in the invasion of pancreatic cancer cells, focusing on the involvement of a disintegrin and metalloproteinase 8 (ADAM8) and matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP9) proteins.
ADAM8 expression is associated with worse survival of pancreatic cancer patients.
Anti-inflammatory macrophages increase pancreatic cancer cell migration rate in basement membrane matrix by inducing ADAM8 and MMP9 expression in cancer cells, thereby possibly enhancing the invasiveness of cancer.
In this study,we investigated the ADAM8 expression in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and its correlation with clinicopathologic features,including the survival of patients with HCC.
Other studies have demonstrated overexpression of some ADAM family proteins in a variety of human tumors, but no report is available on the actual expression of ADAM8 and the correlation between clinicopathologic features and prognosis of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) patients.
To evaluate the association between ADAM8 tissue expression and patient prognosis in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
Some of the previously reported gout associated loci (except ALDH16A1), including ABCG2, SLC2A9, GCKR, ALDH2 and CNIH2, were replicated.
The aim of this study was to examine the role of SLC2A9 and ABCG2 variants in tophaceous disease in people with gout.
The main objective of this study is to elucidate the clinical significance of the SLC2A9/GLUT9 rs11722228 polymorphism among male gout patients.
The genotypic frequencies of SLC2A9/GLUT9 rs1172228 did not differ significantly between the gout cases and the healthy controls.
The genotypic distribution of SLC2A9/GLUT9 rs1172228 in male gout patients did not differ significantly from that of healthy male controls.
The relationship between the SLC2A9 (solute carrier family 2, member 9) gene polymorphisms and gout was still inconsistent among the individual genetic association studies.
Therefore, this present research was aimed to systematically evaluate the association between SLC2A9 gene polymorphisms and gout susceptibility.
This study demonstrated that the genetic susceptibility for gout is associated with the SLC2A9 gene polymorphisms.
Eight variants of ABCG2, SLC2A9, SLC22A12, SLC22A11 and SLC17A3 were genotyped in male individuals in a case-control study with 157 gout (33% tophi), 106 asymptomatic hyperuricaemia and 295 control subjects from Taiwan.
ABCG2 Q141K (T), SLC2A9 rs1014290 (A) and SLC22A12 rs475688 (C) under an additive model and alcohol use independently predicted the risk of gout (respective odds ratio for each factor=2.48, 2.03, 1.95 and 2.48).
The aim of this study was to determine whether polymorphisms in solute carrier family 2 and facilitated glucose transporter member 9 (SLC2A9) are associated with susceptibility to gout.
A meta-analysis was conducted on associations between the rs12510549, rs16890979, and rs1014290 polymorphisms of SLC2A9 and gout susceptibility using fixed and random effects models.
This meta-analysis shows that the rs12510549, rs16890979, and rs1014290 polymorphisms of SLC2A9 protect against the development of gout in Caucasians and/or Asians.
We investigated the association of polymorphisms in the ABCG2 and SLC2A9 genes with gout in Korean patients and healthy individuals.
We demonstrated a significant association between rs2231142 in the ABCG2 gene and gout and identified novel SNPs, c.881A&gt;G and c.1002+78G&gt;A, in the SLC2A9 gene that may be associated with gout in a Korean population.
SLC2A9 and ZNF518B may play a role in gout progression in different populations, but no studies have focused on the Tibetan Chinese population.
We detected 6 single nucleotide polymorphisms in SLC2A9 and ZNF518B in 319 Chinese Tibetan gout patients.
Polymorphisms in SLC2A9 and ZNF518B affected multiple risk factors related to gout development.
This study is the first to investigate and identify positive correlations between SLC2A9 and ZNF518B gene polymorphisms and metabolic indices in Tibetan gout patients.
In conclusion, two patients who developed hypercalcemia associated with bone metastasis after surgery for HCC were treated with alendronate and they experienced alleviation of the pain due to bone metastasis, improvement of their quality of life and a marked decrease in AFP levels with tumor regression.
Coloboma-like optic discs might be an additional feature observed in patients with SPTAN1 mutations.
A newly described autoantibody to alpha-fodrin found in other neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's, further implicate a role for autoimmunity and the neurodegenerative processes in glaucoma.
In a similar experiment, ocular hypertension was induced in four eyes pre-treated with an intravitreal injection of AAV-BIRC4 to assess alpha-fodrin cleavage.
Comparison of the Zrs z-scores between the healthy children and the health groups found significant differences in children with asthma, current wheeze and respiratory symptoms, but not in children born preterm or with early-life wheeze.
The aim of this retrospective study was to assess responses to a bronchodilator by forced oscillation technique (FOT) and to relate the results of respiratory impedance (Zrs) to spirometric parameters in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
The diagnostic efficiency of Zrs, R5 and X35 when diagnosis asthma, expressed by ROC curve parameters, was as follows: AUC (0.721, 0.710, 0.695), sensitivity (62%, 72%, 53%) and specificity (72%, 61%, 76%), respectively.
And R5, X35 and Zrs may provide useful IOS parameters for asthma.
Birth weight less than 3,000 g was associated with larger exercise-induced changes in Zrs and Rrs at 5 Hz, and in reactance (Xrs) at 5 Hz, than those with birth weight more than 3,000 g. Preliminary evidence was found that obesity may be associated with airway obstruction, but not with bronchial hyper-reactivity.
To investigate the nature of mutations in exons 4 and 5 of the uromodulin (UM) gene, including in the area encoding the domain of 8 cysteines (D8C), in patients with multiple myeloma (MM) with the secretion of monoclonal light chains (LC) in cast nephropathy (CN) and without kidney injury.
The aim of the study was to investigate the association of the uromodulin (UMOD) genotype with patient health status and with renal cell carcinoma (RCC) aggressiveness.
In patients diagnosed with renal cell carcinoma and treated with surgery, uromodulin homozygous genotype is associated with more aggressive renal cell carcinoma clinical and pathological characteristics.
CYP11B2 was sequenced if the aldosterone level was high (primary aldosteronism phenotype); SCNN1B, NEDD4L, GRK4, UMOD, and NPPA genes were sequenced if the aldosterone level was low (Liddle phenotype).
MT1F, MT1G, MT1X, and MT2A gene expression was significantly downregulated in colon cancer tissue (p&lt;0.05).
Here, we describe the discovery of a new MSI marker for colorectal cancer located in the 3'-untranslated region (3'UTR, T20 mononucleotide repeat) of the metallothionein 1X gene (MT1XT20).
Indeed, MT1XT20 instability was detected in 36 out of 37 cases (97.3%) of MSI-high colorectal cancers, whereas no MT1XT20 alterations were observed in 254 MSS or in 46 MSI-low cases.
HNF-1Beta regulates tissue-specific gene expression in endometriosis, as well as the expression of several genes, including CD44v9, which binds several molecules, including hyaluronan, epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), leukemia-associated Rho-guanine nucleotide exchange factor (LARG), IQ motif containing GTPase activating protein 1 (IQGAP1), macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF), major histocompatibility complex, class II invariant chain (CD74), cystine transporter subunit (xCT), Fas and extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins.
We sought to determine whether oxidative stress or a relative deficit of l-arginine plays a role in reducing cutaneous vasodilation in response to local heating in chronic kidney disease (CKD).
Eight patients with stage 3-4 CKD and eight age- and sex-matched healthy control (HC) subjects were instrumented with four microdialysis (MD) fibers for the local delivery of 1) Ringers solution (R), 2) 20 mM ascorbic acid (AA), 3) 10 mM l-arginine (l-Arg), and 4) 10 mM N(G)-nitro-l-arginine methyl ester (l-NAME).
The plateau %CVC(max) in the CKD group was significantly greater at the AA and l-Arg sites compared with R (AA: 89 +/- 2; l-Arg: 90 +/- 1; R: 76 +/- 4; P &lt; 0.05) and did not differ from HC.
Initial peak %CVC(max) was also significantly attenuated at the R and l-Arg sites in CKD (P &lt; 0.05) but did not differ at the AA site.
These results suggest that cutaneous microvascular function is impaired in stage 3-4 CKD and that oxidative stress and a deficit of l-arginine play a role in this impairment.
If true, plasma L-arg should be severely reduced in chronic renal failure (CRF); however, plasma L-arg is frequently unchanged in CRF.
l-arg, by its cytoprotective effect, maintained the thiol status, thereby preserving the activities of the membrane bound ATPases and preventing proteinuria and subsequent weight loss in EG-treated rats.
As expected, a physiological analgesia is produced by administration of inhibitors, especially kelatorphan and analogues, demonstrating unambiguously the implication of enkephalinase and aminopeptidase M in enkephalin metabolism.
Associated with antigliadin and anti-HSP antibodies, children with autism and patients with autoimmune disease developed anti-dipeptidylpeptidase I (DPP I), anti-dipeptidylpeptidase IV (DPP IV [or CD26]) and anti-aminopeptidase N (CD13) autoantibodies.
We therefore investigated plasma ApN in anorexia nervosa (AN).
The observed ocular comorbidities included nystagmus (36.7%, 18/49), vitreous opacity (28.6%, 14/49), foveal hypoplasia (20.4%, 10/49), ametropia (12.2%, 6/49), exotropia (12.2%, 6/49), congenital glaucoma (12.2%, 6/49), esotropia (4.1%, 2/49), congenital ptosis (4.1%, 2/49), lens ectopia (4.1%, 2/49), scleral staphyloma (2.0%, 1/49) and pigmentary degeneration of retina (2.0%, 1/49).
The common eye disorders for which genetic testing is commonly requested are briefly discussed - anophthalmia, microphthalmia, coloboma, anterior segment dysgenesis, corneal dystrophies, cataracts, optic atrophy, congenital glaucoma, congenital amaurosis, retinitis pigmentosa, color blindness, juvenile retinoshisis, retinoblastoma etc.
The anatomical causes of blindness include optic nerve disorders in 75 (24.8%) cases, retinal disorders in 55 (18.2%), corneal disorders in 47 (15.6%), lens-related disorders in 39 (12.9%), congenital anomalies in 11 (3.6%), and congenital glaucoma in 20 (6.6%) cases.
Among conditions causing blindness, optic atrophy seen in 73 (24.17%) cases was the most common, followed by retinal dystrophy in 44 (14.56%), corneal scarring in 35 (11.59%), cataract in 22 (7.28%), and congenital glaucoma in 20 (6.6%) cases.
Other abnormalities included vitreous hemorrhage (n=1), congenital glaucoma (n=2), uveal coloboma (n=2), retinopathy mimicking retinopathy of prematurity (n=2), and cystic fovea (n=3).
Primary congenital glaucoma (PCG) is isolated, non-syndromic glaucoma that occurs in the first three years of life and is a major cause of childhood blindness.
The purpose of the present study is to investigate the association between the polymorphisms in AXIN1 with susceptibility to clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC).
In both cultured melanoma cell lines and in vivo in melanoma cell-derived tumor xenografts, 1-benzyl-I3C disrupted canonical Wnt/Beta-catenin signaling that resulted in the down regulation of Beta-catenin protein levels with a concomitant increase in levels of the Beta-catenin destruction complex components GSK3Beta and Axin.
Here, we showed that SKL2001, which has been identified as an activator for Wnt signaling by disrupting the Axin/Beta-Catenin complex, negatively regulates growth of colon cancer spheroids cultured in the 3D condition that simulates tumor microenvironment in vivo.
Defective lysosomal function defines many neurodegenerative diseases, such as neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCL) and Niemann-Pick type C (NPC), and is implicated in Alzheimer's disease (AD) and frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD-TDP) with progranulin (PGRN) deficiency.
Moreover, recent findings indicate that Grn mutations are associated with other neurodegenerative disorders with tau pathology, including Alzheimer's disease.
Together, these critical roles in the CNS suggest that PGRN has the potential to be an important therapeutic target for the treatment of various neurodegenerative disorders, particularly Alzheimer's disease (AD).
Pathological examination revealed Alzheimer's disease in three cases (all LPA), pathological PSP in two cases (one clinical PSP and one PNFA) and corticobasal degeneration in one case (PNFA).
Granulin mutations were initially found in tau-negative patients, though recent findings indicate that these mutations are associated with other neurodegenerative disorders with tau pathology, including Alzheimer's disease and corticobasal degeneration.
Inter-individual variation in CCAAT/enhancer binding protein gamma (CEBPG) transcript expression in normal human bronchial epithelial cells (NBEC) is associated with predisposition to lung cancer.
These data support the hypothesis that genetic variation in linkage disequilibrium with rs2772 influences regulation of CEBPG transcript expression through a trans-effect downstream of RNA polymerase II transcription and confirm that cis-acting genetic variation contributes to inter-individual variation in CEBPG transcript expression in NBEC, which is associated with variation in lung cancer risk.
In an effort to develop a biomarker for lung cancer risk, we evaluated the transcript expressions of 14 antioxidant, DNA repair, and transcription factor genes in normal bronchial epithelial cells (HUGO names CAT, CEBPG, E2F1, ERCC4, ERCC5, GPX1, GPX3, GSTM3, GSTP1, GSTT1, GSTZ1, MGST1, SOD1, and XRCC1).
We sought to review English language research articles examining the presence, clinical significance, and/or pathophysiology of MM in Parkinson's disease (PD), corticobasal syndrome (CBS), essential tremor (ET), focal hand dystonia, Creutzfeldt-Jakob's disease (CJD), and Huntington's disease.
We report a patient that presented with the corticobasal syndrome (CBS), including progressive dementia, asymmetric parkinsonism associated with constructional and ideomotor apraxia, action myoclonus and focal hand dystonia.
Fifteen rearrangements detected in Sezary syndrome patients and SeAx resulted in an expression of new fusion transcripts, nine of them were in frame (EHD1-CAPN12, TMEM66-BAIAP2, MBD4-PTPRC, PTPRC-CPN2, MYB-MBNL1, TFG-GPR128, MAP4K3-FIGLA, DCP1A-CCL27, MBNL1-KIAA2018) and five resulted in ectopic expression of fragments of genes not expressed in normal T-cells (BAIAP2, CPN2, GPR128, CAPN12, FIGLA).
In addition, we found eleven potential cancer-related genes with mutations (EZH1, SPOP, NF1, TCF12, IGF2BP3, KMT2C, CNOT1, BRIP1, KDM5C, STAG2 and MAP4K3) that have not been reported in thyroid follicular tumors.
Since GLK (also named MAP4K3) induces activation of NF-KB, which contributes to tumor progression, we investigated the role of GLK in NSCLC.
GLK protein levels of 190 samples from pulmonary tissue arrays and 58 pulmonary resection samples from stage I to stage III NSCLC patients were studied using immunohistochemistry or immunoblotting.
High levels of GLK proteins were detected in pulmonary tissues from NSCLC patients.
Elevated GLK protein levels were correlated with increased recurrence risks and poor recurrence-free survival rates in NSCLC patients after adjusting for pathologic stage, smoking status, alcohol status, and EGFR levels.
Thus, GLK is a novel prognostic biomarker for NSCLC recurrence.
RNA fusion-based CISs were identified corresponding to both DNA-based CISs (Cdkn2a, Mycl1, Nf2, Pten, Sema6d, and Rere) and additional regions strongly associated with cancer that were not observed by LM-PCR (Myc, Akt1, Pth, Csf1r, Fgfr2, Wisp1, Map3k5, and Map4k3).
Computationally, PTPRF, PRKAR2B, MAP4K3, and RICTOR were calculated as highly drug-targetable genes for breast cancer.
In the GeparTrio FFPE training cohort, a significant linear correlation between TMSB15A expression and pCR was apparent in triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) (n=61, P=0.040).
In normal human prostate and prostate cancer tissues, TMSB15A was the predominant isoform expressed.
In contrast, normal colon and colon cancer tissue expressed predominantly TMSB15B.
Treatment of MCF-7 breast cancer cells with transforming growth factor beta 1 repressed TMSB15A expression but had no effect on TMSB15B.
siRNA specific to the TMSB15B isoform suppressed cell migration of prostate cancer cells to epidermal growth factor, suggesting a functional role for this second isoform.
We showed earlier that human beta-thymosin 15 (Tb15) is up-regulated in prostate cancer, confirming studies from others that propagated Tb15 as a prostate cancer biomarker.
Tb15r is present also in mouse prostate cancer cell lines.
In those patients with isolated adenopathy the following diagnoses were reached; sarcoidosis 23, TB 15, lymphoma 4, carcinoma 4, no diagnosis 1.
However, in this report we provide evidence that TbNB, initially identified in human neuroblastoma, is the only Tb isoform upregulated in human prostate cancer and that the Tb15 sequence is not present herein.
Human NB thymosin beta is a beta-thymosin originally found in neuroblastoma.
Our studies provide the first evidence that Upk1b is directly associated with the development of congenital anomalies of the urinary tract (CAKUT), spontaneous age-dependent hydronephrosis, and dysplastic urothelia.
Upk1b(RFP/RFP) mice developed age-dependent progressive hydronephrosis.
The aim of the present study was to investigate the role of serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine) in the rostral ventromedial medulla (RVM) and spinal cord in pain sensory abnormalities in a 6-hydroxydopamine-treated rat model of Parkinson's disease.
Conclusions These results suggest that the decreased 5-hydroxytryptamine contents in the rostral ventromedial medulla and spinal dorsal horn may be involved in hyperalgesia in the 6-hydroxydopamine-induced rat model of Parkinson's disease.
The role of serotonin7 (5-HT7) receptors in the regulation of depression is poorly understood, particularly in Parkinson's disease-associated depression.
The expression of 13 fibrosis-related microRNAs (miRNAs) (miR-20a, miR-21, miR-27a, miR-27b, miR-29a, miR-29c, miR-92a, miR-122, miR-146a, miR-155, miR-221, miR-222, and miR-224) was analyzed in 194 serums and 177 liver biopsies of patients with either CHB or CHC to develop models to diagnose advanced fibrosis and cirrhosis (Metavir F3-F4).
For this reason, the expression levels of 24 miRNA (let-7c, miR-92a-3p, 423-5p, 150-5p, 223-3p, 125b-5p, 342-3p, miR-206, 122-5p, 375, 223-5p, 10a-5p, 23b-5p, 99a-5p, 23a-5p, 10a-3p, 122-3p, 125b-1-3p, 23b-3p, 125b-2-3p, 23a-3p, 92a-1-5p, 92a-2-5p, 99a-3p) were analyzed in plasma of patients with chronic hepatitis B, HBV-positive cirrhosis and HBV-positive HCC and compared with control group samples.
Consistently, Bhlhb2 expression was significantly higher in PFC of ADHD model SHR than control.
We examined ANG expression in WTs, human fetal kidney (FK) and childhood kidney (NK) samples and studied its relationship with microvascular density (MVD) and with three other hypoxia-induced angiogenic factors: lactate dehydrogenase A (LDHA), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGFA) and BHLHE40 (basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor E40).
ANG, CD31, VEGFA and BHLHE40 mRNA levels were significantly lower in 15 WTs compared with matched-paired NKs.
Mutations in the SLC5A5 gene encoding NIS that result in a non-functional protein lead to congenital hypothyroidism due to I- transport defect (ITD).
Thyroid concentrates radioactive iodine by sodium-iodide symporter; this is used for treating hyperthyroidism and thyroid cancer.
In this study, we investigated the relationship between iodine content and sodium iodide symporter (NIS) expression by using the clinical specimens from patients with nodular goiter and explored the pathogenesis triggered by iodine deficiency in nodular goiter.
The same technique was used for the assays of the hepatic levels of FGF-21, silent information regulator (SIRT1), malondialdehyde (MDA),IL-10, tumor necrosis factor-Alfa (TNF-Alfa) as well as the apoptotic markers; caspase-3 and B-cell lymphoma (Bcl-2).
We report here the case of a 25-year-old woman with a bulbar onset ALS that progressed in less than 12 months to invasive ventilation due to respiratory failure; Genetic screening identified a new mutation in the FUS gene that lies within the last codon.
The expression and biological function of Grb2-associated binding 2 (Gab2) in renal cell carcinoma (RCC) cells was tested here.
However, the significance of Grb2 and Sos proteins, which is related to EGF-triggered Ras activation, has not been elucidated in human bladder cancer.
On the other hand, expression of Grb2 and Sos proteins was substantially increased in all human bladder cancer cell lines examined in comparison with cultured normal urothelial cells, whether codon 12 of H-ras was mutated or not.
These results suggest that the amplification of both Grb2 and SOS proteins plays an important role in the carcinogenesis of human bladder cancer.
In the 32 patients studied, bladder cancer was diagnosed as pTaG1-2 in 8 cases, pT1G2 in 6, pT1G3 in 7, pT2G2-3 in 7, pT3G2-3 in 3 and pT4 in 1 patient.
In this study, we investigated whether silencing Wnt2B expression could inhibit the invasiveness of ovarian cancer cells and reduce drug resistance.
These data suggest that Wnt2B indeed plays an important role in ovarian cancer metastasis and drug resistance.
WNT2B is expressed in several types of human cancer, such as basal cell carcinoma, gastric cancer, breast cancer, head/neck squamous cell carcinoma, cervical cancer and leukemia.
Among various cancer cell lines, the Wnt-13 mRNA was detected in HeLa (cervical cancer), MKN28 and MKN74 (gastric cancer).
The receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase PTPRG has been genetically associated with psychiatric disorders and is a ligand for members of the contactin family, which are themselves linked to autism spectrum disorders.
Based on our finding of a phosphatase-null de novo mutation in PTPRG associated with a case of sporadic schizophrenia, we used PTPRG knockout (KO) mice to model the effect of a loss-of-function mutation.
The most notable behavioral consequences of PTPRG gene inactivation were reduced immobilization in the forced swim test, suggestive of some negative symptoms of schizophrenia.
The subgroups significantly differed in important features, including specific working memory deficits for PTPRG (n=5); severe negative symptoms, global cognitive deficits and poor educational attainment, suggesting a developmental disorder, for SLC39A13 (n=4); slow processing speed, childhood attention deficit disorder and milder symptoms for TGM5 (n=4); and global cognitive deficits with good educational attainment suggesting neurodegeneration for ARMS/KIDINS220 (n=5).
First, whole exome sequencing was conducted to identify disruptive de novo mutations in 14 complete parent-offspring trios with sporadic schizophrenia from Jerusalem, which identified 5 sporadic cases with de novo gene mutations in 5 different genes (PTPRG, TGM5, SLC39A13, BTK, CDKN3).
Next, targeted exome capture of these genes was conducted in 48 well-characterized, unrelated, ethnically diverse schizophrenia cases, recruited and characterized by the same research team in New York (NY sample), which demonstrated extremely rare and potentially damaging variants in three of the five genes (MAF&lt;0.01) in 12/48 cases (25%); including PTPRG (5 cases), SCL39A13 (4 cases) and TGM5 (4 cases), a higher number than usually identified by whole exome sequencing.
Activated astrocytes were found to be strongly positive for RPTPGamma also in a mice model of Alzheimer's disease.
Aqueous humor (AH) samples from 14 patients with presumed tuberculous uveitis (PTU), and 30 control patients were assayed for the proinflammatory cytokines interleukin IL-4, IL-12, IL-15, IL-17, interferon (IFN)-Gamma, and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-Alfa, the immunosuppressive cytokine IL-10, and the chemokines GRO-Alfa/CXCL1, IL-8/CXCL8, MIG/CXCL9, IP-10/CXCL10 and SDF-1/CXCL12 with the use of a multiplex assay.
Aqueous humor (AH) samples from patients with Behcet's disease (BD) (n=29), Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada (VKH) disease (n=21), and HLA-B27-associated uveitis (n=8), and 42 control patients were assayed for the neutrophil chemoattractants CXCL1/GRO-Alfa and CXCL8/IL-8 and the lymphocyte chemoattractants CXCL9/MIG, CXCL10/IP-10 and CXCL12/SDF-1 with the use of a multiplex chemokine assay.
In patients with the same disease activity, AH levels of GRO-Alfa and IP-10 were significantly higher in patients with BD than in patients with VKH disease and HLA-B27-associated uveitis (p=0.0474; p&lt;0.001, respectively).
These data suggest that GRO-Alfa and IP-10 are the predominant CXC chemokines involved in neutrophil and activated T lymphocyte chemoattraction in endogenous uveitis, particularly in BD.
The purpose of this study was to investigate the role and regulation of the CXC chemokine GRO and the interaction between GRO and IL-8 in LPS-induced uveitis in rabbits.
Taken together, our results suggest that GRO is an essential mediator for neutrophil infiltration in LPS-induced uveitis in rabbits.
Na(+)K(+)ATPase, NKCC1, and alpha-syntrophin were expressed within sensory epithelia and were unaltered in Meniere's disease specimens.
Although an elevated hemoglobin A1c (HbAc1) level is an independent predictor of worse survival in patients with both digestive cancer and diabetes mellitus, its relationship to short-term prognosis in these patients has not been addressed.
We identified novel driver mutations that developed during adenoma and cancer evolution, particularly in OR1B1 (GPCR signaling pathway) for adenoma evolution, and LAMA1 (PI3K-Akt signaling pathway) and ADCY3 (FGFR signaling pathway) for CRC evolution.
Recently, we provided human validation for a cooperating oncogenic role for cAMP in brain tumorigenesis when we found that SNPs in ADCY8 were correlated with glioma (brain tumor) risk in individuals with Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1).
However, the cAMP pathway is well-known to be sexually dimorphic, and SNPs in ADCY8 affected glioma risk in a sex-specific fashion, elevating the risk for females while protecting males.
Here, we report genetic polymorphisms in the human adenylate cyclase gene adenylate cyclase 8 (ADCY8) that correlate with glioma risk in NF1 in a sex-specific manner, elevating risk in females while reducing risk in males.
Overall, our results establish a sex-specific role for cAMP regulation in human gliomagenesis, specifically identifying ADCY8 as a modifier of glioma risk in NF1.
The effect of insulin on the oxidative desaturation of 1-14C palmitic acid to palmitoleic acid (delta 9 desaturase) 1-14C linoleic acid to alpha-linolenic acid (delta 6 desaturase) on rat liver microsomes and 1-14C eicosa-8,11,14-trienoic acid to arachidonic acid (delta 5 desaturase) on rat liver microsomes and hepatoma tissue culture (HTC) cells was studied.
Methylation of CALCA, CDH1, DAPK1, and EVX2 was more common in squamous cell carcinomas (SCC) compared to adenocarcinomas (ADC).
Overall, CALCA, DAPK, ESR1, TIMP3, APC and RAR-beta2 promoters were significantly more often hypermethylated in cancers than in controls, while adenocarcinomas were more often hypermethylated above the highest control ratio for APC, TIMP3 and RASSF1A promoters.
Combining 4 genes (CALCA, DAPK, ESR1 and APC) yielded a sensitivity of 89% (with all adenocarcinomas identified), equal to cytomorphology (89%) and high-risk human papilloma virus (Hr-HPV; 90%).
The thyroid tumor was diagnosed as metastasis to the thyroid from lung adenocarcinoma, because it showed mucin production, positive immunoreactivity for carcinoembryonic antigen and negative immunoreactivities for thyroglobulin and calcitonin.
We searched Medline for clinical trials that assessed disease-modifying drugs for relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis published from Sept 1, 2008, to Oct 31, 2012.
SEPT1, SEPT4, and SEPT2 have been found in deposits known as neurofibrillary tangles and glial fibrils in Alzheimer's disease.
Finally, we evaluated the effect of the pro-arousal neuropeptides CRF and Hcrt-1/Ox-A in NPSR-deficient mice.
The administration of CRF and Hcrt-1/Ox-A, two classic pro-arousal peptides, elicited the same effects in both NPSR(-/-) and wild type mice, ruling out the possibility that adaptive mechanisms occurring at the level of these two systems could have occurred during NPSR(-/-) development to compensate for the lack of NPSR receptors.
Moreover, we demonstrated that the deletion of NPSR did not lead to compensatory changes in the vigilance-promoting effects of the CRF and Hcrt-1/Ox-A systems.
We included all RCTs of any calcimimetic agent, cinacalcet HCl (AMG-073, Sensipar), NPS R-467 or NPS R-568 administered to patients with CKD for the treatment of SHPT.
Renal osteodystrophy (RO) due to secondary hyperparathyroidism (HPT) in chronic renal failure was an obvious target for studying the effects of NPS R-568.
Changes in BIS (bispectral index) VISTA bilateral monitoring system associated with intraoperative episodes of generalized and focal seizures, during total intravenous anesthesia for resection of a left frontal parasagittal meningioma, are herein described.
Previous studies identified a variety of putative target genes from several pathways associated with DNA damage repair, chromatin remodeling complex, PI3K-AKT-mTOR signaling, Notch signaling, cell cycle checkpoint signaling, BRCA-associated complex and Fanconi's anemia susceptibility genes that could be used as biomarkers or therapeutic targets for PARP inhibition.
Hematologic toxicities, including neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, and anemia, are major adverse effects of PARP inhibitors (PARPis), but the incidence rate and overall risk has not been systematically studied.
A total of 2,479 patients from 12 RCTs revealed that the incidence of PARPi-associated severe hematologic toxicities was, respectively: neutropenia: 32.9% (95% CI, 20.5%-48.3%); thrombocytopenia: 15.9% (95% CI, 9.5%-25.4%), and anemia: 9.1% (95% CI, 5.1%-15.7%).
Examples of endocrine syndromes are classical carcinoid syndrome caused by serotonin (measured in the urine as its metabolite 5-HIAA), insulinoma syndrome caused by insulin or proinsulin, Zollinger-Ellison syndrome resulting from gastrin secretion, glucagonoma syndrome caused by glucagon, WDHA syndrome caused by vasoactive intestinal peptide, or Cushing's syndrome resulting from ectopic production of adrenocorticotropic hormone or corticotropin-releasing hormone.
We have previously reported and confirmed that vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) is a significant stimulator of ACTH and cortisol secretion in at least some patients with Cushing's disease.
We have also found that the hormonal responses to corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) in VIP-responsive patients with Cushing's disease were higher than those in VIP non-responders, which suggested a linkage between the actions of CRH and VIP in this disorder.
This study is the first to demonstrate the parallel inhibition by DEX of ACTH and cortisol responses to CRH and VIP in Cushing's disease.
Of the patients with Cushing's disease, 9 (75%) were responsive to hCRH, 5 (42%) were to VIP, and 3 (25%) were to PHM, showing significant increases in both ACTH and cortisol.
In addition, in the patients with Cushing's disease the coadministration of hCRH with PHM or VIP produced additive increases in both ACTH and cortisol.
Abnormalities in hypothalamic-pituitary adrenal axis function were demonstrated by measuring plasma adrenocorticotropin abnormal concentrations following Vasoactive Intestinal Peptide (VIP) and Corticotropin Releasing Hormone (CRH) administration during a phase of remission of Cushing's disease in a 45-year-old female patient.
We conclude that the study of ACTH and cortisol response to VIP and CRH may be useful in revealing Cushing's disease even during a remission phase of the disorder.
Here we introduce a cell culture model of EAD propagation consisting of monolayers of cultured neonatal rat ventricular myocytes treated with anthopleurin-A (AP-A).
The present study provides evidence in support of the hypothesis that AP-A-induced ventricular tachyarrhythmias are due to bradycardia-dependent EAD and triggered activity.
TU alternans was investigated by MAP recordings in six normal dogs, following the administration of anthopleurin-A (AP-A), a drug shown to delay sodium inactivation and to induce bradycardia dependent long QTU, EADs, and TdP.
Moreover, a series of recent studies have genetically and functionally linked kalirin signaling to several disorders, including schizophrenia and Alzheimer's disease.
A series of recent studies has improved our understanding of spine dynamics by establishing kalirin-7 as an important regulator of dendritic spine development as well as structural and functional plasticity, providing a model for the molecular control of structural plasticity and implicating kalirin-7 in synaptic pathology in several disorders including schizophrenia and Alzheimer's disease.
Here, we report that inhibition of the cell cycle-dependent kinase 9 (Cdk9) by RNA interference, or the compound flavopiridol, blocked infections with HAdV-C2/5, EKC-causing HAdV-D8/37, and progeny formation in human corneal epithelial and cancer cells.
The study identifies Cdk9 as a postexposure drug target against adenovirus infections in vitro and suggests that the clinically tested anticancer drug flavopiridol is a candidate for treating adenoviral EKC or adenovirus emergence upon immune suppression.
We conclude that: 1) synthetic non-thiazolidinediones can serve as ligands of PPARgamma and PPARdelta; 2) ligand-dependent activation of PPARdelta involves an apparent conformational change and association of the receptor ligand binding domain with CREB-binding protein; 3) PPARgamma activation (but not PPARdelta or PPARalpha activation) is sufficient to potentiate preadipocyte differentiation; 4) non-thiazolidinedione PPARgamma agonists improve hyperglycemia and hypertriglyceridemia in vivo; 5) although PPARalpha activation is sufficient to affect triglyceride metabolism, PPARdelta activation does not appear to modulate glucose or triglyceride levels.
At present, four loci associated with non-syndromic auditory neuropathy have been mapped: Autosomal recessive deafness-9 [DFNB9; the otoferlin (OTOF) gene] and autosomal recessive deafness-59 [DFNB59; the pejvakin (PJVK) gene], associated with autosomal recessive inheritance; the autosomal dominant auditory neuropathy gene [AUNA1; the diaphanous-3 (DIAPH3) gene]; and AUNX1, linked to chromosome X.
Presence of antibodies to carbamylated fetal calf serum (CarP-FCS) and fibrinogen (CarP-Fib) was determined by inhouse ELISAs among RA cases in the Leiden Early Arthritis Clinic (n=846) and in the Swedish Epidemiological Investigation of Rheumatoid Arthritis (n=1985) cohorts.
To detect the antibodies against human fibrinogen (FIB) Beta67-77 peptide and citrullinated human FIB Beta67-77 peptide in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and examine their diagnostic values in RA.
Polymyositis/dermatomyositis, systemic lupus erythematosus and Addison's disease, three conditions regulated by the HLA-B8-DR3 haplotype, were most strongly associated with MG, especially early-onset disease.
The prevalence of sporadic inclusion body myositis (sIBM) was correlated with the frequency of HLA-DR3.
The B8-DR3 haplotype fragment conferred the strongest susceptibility (OR 2.9, 95% CI 1.8-4.6), and the B-DR region of other ancestral haplotypes was associated with myositis subgroups.
Most gastric IFPs were associated with chronic atrophic gastritis while only one ileal polyp was associated with Meckels diverticulum.
CBR1, DYRK1A, HMGN1, ITSN1, RCAN1, SON, TMEM50B, and TTC3 were each up-regulated two-fold in Down syndrome samples compared to normal samples; of these, SON and TTC3 were newly reported.
In this report we show that high levels of the TTC3 protein, encoded by one of the genes of the Down Syndrome Critical Region (DCR), prevent neurite extension and disrupt Golgi compactness in differentiating primary neurons.
TTC3 contains a canonical RING finger motif, a pair of tetratricopeptide motifs, a putative Akt phosphorylation site, and nuclear localization signals, and is encoded by a gene within the Down syndrome (DS) critical region on chromosome 21.
Nonchimeric polytransgenic 152F7 mice encompassing four human chromosome 21 genes (DSCR3, DSCR5, TTC3, and DYRK1A) within the Down syndrome critical region present with learning and memory impairment.
Multivariate regression analysis revealed that plasma VWF Ag level is an independent predictor of mortality in ARDS pediatric patients.
Plasma VWF Ag level is an excellent predictive marker for outcome in children with ALI/ARDS.
In the multicenter study, patients with direct ARDS also had lower levels of von Willebrand factor antigen and IL-6 and IL-8, markers of endothelial injury and inflammation, respectively.
To investigate the role of endothelial cell mediators, E-selectin (ES), intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1), tissue factor (TF), and von Willebrand factor (vWF), in the early phase of severe acute pancreatitis (SAP) complicated with respiratory failure [pancreatitis-associated lung injury (PALI)].
Thus, CLC-2 may be a promising and potential novel therapeutic strategy for combating primary open-angle glaucoma.
In type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) patients, chronic kidney disease (CKD) progression may occur without detectable changes in urinary albumin excretion (UAE) rate.
To investigate, for the first time, the impact of systolic pulmonary arterial pressure (PASP) on maximal exercise capacity in adults with mild-to-moderate cystic fibrosis, without PH at rest.
Assays of carboxypeptidase B-like activity and C3 in serum from patients with cystic fibrosis and appropriate control subjects failed to demonstrate a deficiency of carboxypeptidase B-like activity or a consistent increase in C3, as was suggested by Conover and associates.
Differences between men and women with cystic fibrosis were apparent, in that women with cystic fibrosis had higher concentrations of both serum carboxypeptidase B-like activity and C3 than either men with cystic fibrosis or control subjects.
The properties and lysosomal distribution of the enzyme indicated that it was a carboxypeptidase B. Substrate affinity, thermolability, pH stability, the fall and rise in activity with subculture, the cyclical pattern of activity through serial passage and the level of activity were similar for the control and cystic fibrosis enzyme.
In this review the roles identified for different selenoproteins in these steps and how they may promote or inhibit metastatic cancers is discussed.
Indeed, many selenoproteins have antioxidant activity which can attenuate cancer development by minimizing oxidative insult and resultant DNA damage.
In this review, we discuss what is currently known about selenoproteins in tumorigenesis with a focus on their contextual roles in cancer development, growth, and progression.
New aspects of Se actions in breast cancer have emerged such as the impact of genetic polymorphisms on Se metabolism and response, new functions of selenoproteins, epigenetic modulation of gene expression, and long-term influence of early-life exposure on disease risk.
We observed that both SelS and C99 were colocalized in the membrane fraction of mouse neuroblastoma Neuro2a (N2a) cells.
The results suggest that decreased NPY expression in the extended amygdala might be causally linked with the depression induced following type 2 diabetes and that the antidepressant action of imipramine in diabetic mice might be mediated by NPY-NPY Y1 receptor system.
Numerous models of obesity and diabetes are characterized by increased central nervous system (CNS) neuropeptide Y (NPY); in fact, a single intracerebroventricular (icv) administration of NPY in lean fasted rats elevates hepatic VLDL-TG secretion and does so, in large part, via signaling through the CNS NPY Y1 receptor.
We investigated whether annexin A8 (A-A8), a Ca-binding protein overexpressed in pancreatic cancer, plays a role in cell growth and migration and investigated its association with pancreatic cancer prognosis.
Although Annexin A8 (ANXA8), a member of a superfamily of calcium and phospholipid binding proteins, is physiologically expressed in a tissue-specific manner, recent microarray studies reported that ANXA8 was also ectopically expressed in pancreatic cancers.
We investigated the molecular mechanism of expression of ANXA8 in cancer cells and its functional role in pancreatic cancer cells.
To investigate the utility of 26 immunohistochemical markers (CAM 5.2, CK [cytokeratin] 7, CK20, CK17, CK19, MUC1, MUC2, MUC4, MUC5AC, MUC6, p53, DPC4/SMAD4, CDX2, pVHL [von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor gene protein], S100P, IMP-3 [insulin-like growth factor 2 messenger RNA binding protein 3], maspin, mesothelin, claudin 4, claudin 18, annexin A8, fascin, PSCA [prostate stem cell antigen], MOC31, CEA [carcinoembryonic antigen], and CA19-9 [cancer antigen 19-9]) in the diagnosis of ductal adenocarcinoma of the pancreas.
Claudin 18 and annexin A8 are frequently highly overexpressed in infiltrating ductal adenocarcinomas when compared with normal reactive ducts, suggesting a role for these molecules in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas.
Multivariate analysis further confirmed that miR-340-low/ROCK1-high expression was an independent prognostic factor of unfavorable survival in pediatric osteosarcoma (for overall survival: p = 0.006, for progression-free survival: p = 0.008).
Our data offer convincing evidence, for the first time, that the combined miR-340 downregulation and ROCK1 upregulation may be linked to tumor progression and adverse prognosis in pediatric osteosarcoma.
We analyzed the effects of 3 war components-combat exposure (CES), observation of abusive violence (OBS), and participation in abusive violence (PARTC)-and sense of coherence (SOC) on the development of both posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and depression among a sample of war veterans.
The expression levels of miR-155 in 38 pairs of cancer tissues and adjacent normal tissues from breast cancer patients were detected using quantitative real-time PCR.
Soft agar colony formation assay and tumor xenografts showed inhibition of miR-155 could significantly reduce proliferation of cancer cells in vivo and vitro, which confirmed that miR-155 is an effective therapeutic target of breast cancer.
Our results underscore the importance of miR-155 as a therapeutic target and combination of Doxorubicinol and miR-155-silencing would be a potential way to cure breast cancer.
We have quantified expression of seven oncomiRs, namely miR-17/92 cluster (miR-17, miR-18a, miR-19a and miR-20a), miR-21, miR-27a and miR-155, in plasma of 137 breast cancer (BC) patients.
Our results suggested that MIAT acted as a competing endogenous RNA (ceRNA) to regulate the expression of dual specificity phosphatase 7 (DUSP7) by taking up miR-155-5p in breast cancer.
We conclude that MIAT promotes breast cancer progression and functions as ceRNA to regulate DUSP7 expression by sponging miR-155-5p in breast cancer.
Four oncogenic microRNAs (miR-155, miR-19a, miR-181b, and miR-24) and one tumor suppressor microRNA (let-7a) were shown to differentiate between high- and low-risk early breast cancer (EBC) and reflect the surgical tumor removal and adjuvant therapy.
The present study determined the role of postoperative wound fluids (WFs) from patients diagnosed with breast cancer subsequent to breast conserving surgery or breast conserving surgery followed by IORT on the expression of three microRNAs (miRNAs), consisting of miR-21, miR-155 and miR-221, in distinct breast cancer cell lines that represent the general subtypes of breast cancer.
Additionally, it was indicated that both WFs and RT-WF strongly downregulated the expression of miR-21, miR-155 and miR-221 in basal/epithelial and luminal subtypes of breast cancer.
The expression of three different microRNAs (miR-9, miR-21, and miR-155) in 52 formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) primary cervical cancer tissue samples and 50 FFPE normal cervical tissue samples were evaluated.
MiR-9, miR-21, and miR-155 were significantly overexpressed in cervical cancer tissues compared to normal tissues (P &lt; 0.001).
MiR-21 and miR-155 expression combined with the HPV E6/E7 mRNA assay in HPV E6/E7 negative cervical cancer showed increased AUC of 0.7267 and 0.7000, respectively (P = 0.01, P = 0.04), demonstrating their potential as diagnostic tools.
Moreover, miR-21 and miR-155 were predictors showing a 7 fold and 10.3 fold higher risk for HPV E6/E7 negative patients with cervical cancer (P = 0.024 and P = 0.017, respectively) while miR-155 was a predictor showing a 27.9 fold higher risk for HPV E6/E7 positive patients with cervical cancer (P &lt; 0.0001).
MiR-21 and miR-155 may be helpful in the prediction of both HPV positive and HPV negative cases of cervical cancer.
The purpose of this study was to analyze the clinicopathologic significance of expression of EMT-related miRNAs, miR-9 and miR-155, in triple-negative breast cancers (TNBCs).
Then, based on the experimentally validated miRNA regulations to target genes, 4 candidate miRNAs (miR-24-3p, miR-192-5p, miR-139-5p and miR-155-5p) were identified to potentially contribute to ovarian cancer cell chemoresistance to CDDP through mediating OVCAR-8R cell CDDP resistance-related gene modules, which participated in functions that were closely related to "apoptosis", "cell cycle" and "adhesion".
The renal involvement may present with symptoms arising from interstitial nephritis, mainly distal renal tubular acidosis.
In a 29-year-old female patient, with bilateral nephrolithiasis, the diagnosis of primary Sjoegren's syndrome, tubulo-interstitial nephritis, distal renal tubular acidosis, and hypokalemia were established.
Tubulo-interstitial nephritis constitutes the most frequent renal lesion and distal tubular acidosis (Type 1) is the most important clinical manifestation of this tubular dysfunction, although the occurrence of chronic renal insufficiency is not an uncommon finding in the presence of distal renal tubular acidosis.
Right atrial thrombosis is classified as two type: A (mobile, thin) and B (non mobile and attached to atrial wall) that they are probably of cardiac origin due to local pathology, indwelling catheter, atrial fibrillation, stasis, rheumatological or hematological disease like protein C or S deficiency.
Venous stasis (e.g., immobilization, congestive heart failure, acute myocardial infarction, obesity), hypercoagulability (e.g., malignancy, inflammatory bowel disease, hyperhomocysteinemia, protein C resistance, antithrombin III, protein C or S deficiency) and endothelial trauma (e.g., surgical trauma, venous trauma, in-dwelling venous instrumentation) are risk factors.
To evaluate the use of selective vs. non-selective cyclo-oxygenase inhibitors (COXIs) for the treatment of chronic non-infectious, non-necrotizing scleritis and episcleritis.
Sixty-nine patients with scleritis and episcleritis treated for &gt;=2 months with COXIs were included.
Initial inflammation control was achieved in 78-81% of scleritis patients and 73-80% episcleritis patients on COXIs (p &gt; .05).
Selective vs. non-selective COXIs were equally efficacious for the treatment of chronic non-infectious, non-necrotizing scleritis and episcleritis.
Here we show that KIAA0793, containing substantial sequence homology with the catalytic Dbl homology domain of the faciogenital dysplasia gene product (FGD1), is a specific GEF for Cdc42.
The faciogenital dysplasia gene product, FGD1, is a Dbl family member that has recently been shown to function as a CDC42-specific GEF.
The majority of proteins that contain a DH (Dbl homology) domain were isolated as oncogenes in transfection assays, but two members of the DH family, FGD1 (the product of the faciogenital dysplasia or Aarskog-Scott syndrome locus) and Vav, have been shown to be essential for normal embryonic development.
Here we have examined the role of a Dbl-like molecule, the faciogenital dysplasia gene product (FGD1), which when mutated in its Dbl homology domain, cosegregates with the developmental disease Aarskog-Scott syndrome.
Non-survivors (n=29) versus survivors (n=46) were: older (77+/-9.8 vs 68+/-14, p=0.006), had higher New York Heart Association (NYHA) class (2.7+/-0.8 vs 2.3+/-0.8, p=0.037), higher brain natriuretic peptide (1157+/-717 vs 427+/-502 pg/mL, p=0.024, n=18), more coronary artery disease (61% vs 35%, p=0.031), more frequent left ventricular ejection fraction &lt;50% (20.7% vs 4.3%, p=0.026), more functional MR (41% vs 22%, p=0.069), higher mitral E/E(') (12.7+/-4.6 vs 9.8+/-4, p=0.008), higher pulmonary artery systolic pressure (PASP; 52.6+/-18.7 vs 36.7+/-14, p &lt;0.001), more &gt;=3+ tricuspid regurgitation (28% vs 4%, p=0.005) and more right ventricular dysfunction (26% vs 6%, p=0.035).
The presence of RBBB, IVCD, PASP &gt;= 40 mmHg, left atrium diameter and NYHA functional class were independent predictors of all-cause mortality in DCM patients.
The goals of therapy, which should be highlighted in follow-up imaging, include not only reduction of PASP, decrease in pulmonary vascular resistance, and improvements in right ventricular function, cardiac output, and tricuspid regurgitation.
The objective of this study was to determine the prognostic significance of CD163(+) cells, interleukin-10 (IL-10), and interferon-gamma (IFN-Gamma) in oral lesions associated with oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC).
beta-defensin expression was quantitatively assessed using real-time polymerase chain reactions in OSCC and control cell lines after exposure to interleukin-1beta, tumor necrosis factor-alpha, and interferon-gamma.
We investigated the utility of J chain and MEF2B in the diagnosis of CHL, NLPHL, PMBL, T-cell/histiocyte-rich large B-cell lymphoma (TCRLBL), and B-cell lymphoma, unclassifiable, with features intermediate between diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and CHL (BCLU, DLBCL/CHL) compared to OCT-2 and BOB.1.
J chain and MEF2B are highly sensitive and specific markers of NLPHL versus CHL, are particularly useful in highlighting LP cells, and, with rare exception, are of greater utility than OCT-2 and BOB.1 in differentiating CHL from NLPHL and other large B-cell lymphomas.
We identified several consensus differentially expressed genes and these genes were further confirmed with literature mining; at last, two genes, that is, immunoglobulin J chain and C-X-C motif chemokine ligand 17, were screened as novel gastric cancer associated genes.
A discovery/validation study on RR-MS responsive to glatiramer acetate identified 8 differentially expressed genes: ITGA2B, ITGB3, CD177, IGJ, IL5RA, MMP8, P2RY12, and S100Beta.
For the transcriptome analysis, we found some genes related to Alzheimer's disease (LRP1), an insulin-like growth factor receptor (IGF2R), immunity genes (IGL family and IGJ), two genes related to inflammatory reaction (CXCL5 and CCL3), one gene related to maintenance of cellular morphology (NHS), one gene considered to be a strong apoptosis inductor (LGALS14), and several transcripts of the neuroblastoma breakpoint family (NBPF).
Using principal components analysis, spots containing immunoglobulin J chain, apolipoprotein A-I, procollagen C-endopeptidase enhancer-1 and complement C4-A were associated with lymphoma development (P &lt; 0.0001).
The relationship between combined temperature factors showed a linear impact until reaching high temperatures limiting malaria incidence, with a lag 3.25 months.
Experimental models of malaria have shown that the regulatory molecules, cytotoxic T-lymphocyte attenuator-4 (CTLA-4), lymphocyte activation gene-3 (LAG-3), and programmed death-1 (PD-1) are involved in the functional impairment of T cells during infection.
We evaluated the HLA-G 3' untranslated region (3'UTR) polymorphic sites (associated with mRNA stability and target for microRNA binding) and HLA-G tissue expression (heart, colon, and esophagus) in patients presenting Chagas disease, stratified according to the major clinical variants.
Chagas disease patients exhibited differential HLA-G 3'UTR susceptibility allele/genotype/haplotype patterns, according to the major clinical variant (digestive/cardiac/mixed/indeterminate).
We studied the arthritis association and the spliceo-transcriptome of four different Ltab-Ncr3 haplotypes and showed that higher Ltb and Ncr3 expression, lower Lst1 expression, and the expression of a shorter splice variant of Lst1 correlate with reduced arthritis severity in rats.
The C825T polymorphism (rs5443) of the Guanine Nucleotide-Binding protein subunit Beta3 (GNB3) gene has been associated with obesity, essential hypertension, atherosclerosis, coronary diseases, and cerebrovascular events, but with some sex-specific effects.
The guanine nucleotide-binding protein beta polypeptide 3 (GNB3) 825T allele encodes a product that enhances the activation of heterotrimeric G proteins, which is associated with the occurrence of the splice variant GBeta3 s that could play a role in vascular reactivity and hyperproliferation of smooth muscle cells, that makes such proteins attractive candidate gene products for susceptibility to essential hypertension (EH).
In our investigation of how Ang II signals are converted by the AT1R from physiological to pathological outputs, we found that the purinergic P2Y6 receptor (P2Y6R), an inflammation-inducible G protein (heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding protein)-coupled receptor (GPCR), promoted Ang II-induced hypertension in mice.
We identified the role of regulator of G protein (heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding protein) signaling 5 (RGS5) in blood pressure regulation during pregnancy and preeclampsia.
Here, we investigated the expression and function of NR6A1 and its underlying mechanisms in prostate cancer (PCa) patients who underwent radical prostatectomy.
A total of 303 cases of prostate cancer after radical prostatectomy were analysed in a tissue microarray (TMA) for NR6A1 immunohistochemistry-based protein expression.
Knockdown of NR6A1 by small interfering RNA mediated gene silencing and overexpression of NR6A1 through lentivirus were utilized to investigate its potential role in prostate cancer cells.
In addition, gene silencing of NR6A1 resulted in G0/G1 phase cell cycle arrest, and decreased metastatic and invasive potential of prostate cancer cells DU145 and PC3.
In contrast, overexpression of NR6A1 reduced G0/G1 phase cell cycle arrest, and promoted metastatic and invasive potential of prostate cancer cells 22RV1.
The increasing age and number of RTR is likely to be paralleled by an increase of prostate cancer (PCa) incidence.
We conducted a multicenter retrospective study and reviewed the charts and records of 20 RTRs who had undergone RRP for localized prostate cancer at four French renal transplant centers belonging to the Renal Transplantation Committee of the French Urological Association from April 1996 to April 2007.
In our study, RRP was a safe procedure to treat localized prostate cancer in RTRs.
In this study, we examine the expression of RTR in murine placenta and several human placental choriocarcinoma cell lines.
RTR mRNA was also expressed in rat choriocarcinoma Rcho-1 cells and in the human placental choriocarcinoma cell lines BeWo, JAR, and JEG-3.
To evaluate the prognostic significance of PSA nadir (nPSA) and the time to nadir in disease free of recurrence (DFR) in localized carcinoma of prostate treated with radical radiotherapy (RTR).
The present study was aimed to determine the effect of steviol on PC1, CFTR, and Beta-catenin levels in renal epithelial cells with defective PC1 biogenesis and expression (Prkcsh-/- cell) and postnatal Pkd1 homozygous cell (Pkd1-/- cells).
Using western blot analysis, it was found that steviol treatment at 100myM for 24-48h substantially enhanced and stabilized PC1 C-terminal expression, while decreasing CFTR and Beta-catenin protein expression in both Prkcsh-/- and Pkd1-/- cells.
KPT-9274 can attenuate cellular proliferation and induce apoptosis associated with a decrease in active (phosphorylated) PAK4 and Beta-catenin in several Pkd1-null murine cell lines, with a less pronounced effect on the corresponding phenotypically normal cells.
Given the fundamental role of Beta-catenin signaling in intestinal epithelial cell proliferation and the growth-promoting function of protein kinase D1 (PKD1) in these cells, we hypothesized that PKDs mediate cross talk with Beta-catenin signaling.
GPCR stimulation also induced the formation of a complex between PKD1 and Beta-catenin, as shown by coimmunoprecipitation that depended on PKD1 catalytic activation, as it was abrogated by cell treatment with PKD family inhibitors.
Using transgenic mice that express elevated PKD1 protein in the intestinal epithelium, we detected a marked increase in the localization of Beta-catenin in the nucleus of crypt epithelial cells in the ileum of PKD1 transgenic mice, compared with nontransgenic littermates.
Pachyonychia congenita subjects were sampled who exhibited a mutation in KRT6A, KRT6B, KRT6C, KRT16 or KRT17, and the proteins were digested and analyzed by tandem mass spectrometry.
We thus performed extensive biomarker measures in these compartments using univariate and multivariate approaches to correlate disease biomarkers with SCORAD and with a combined hyperplasia score [thickness and keratin 16 (K16) mRNA] at baseline and after cyclosporine A treatment in 25 moderate to severe AD patients.
In addition to increased abundance, KRT16 demonstrated autoantigenicity, since sera from both fracture mice and CRPS patients showed increased autoantibody binding to recombinant kRT16 protein.
The identification of autoantibodies against KRT16 as a biomarker in mice and in humans is a critical step towards these goals, and towards redefining CRPS as having an autoimmune etiology.
These findings were associated with upregulation of mitochondrial Bak and Bcl-2/Bcl-xL, proapoptotic and prosurvival members in the Bcl-2 family, respectively, as well as increased mitochondrial cytochrome c release, caspase activation, and apoptosis in pancreatitis in PKCEpsilon knockout mice.
We then microinjected a GABAA receptor antagonist, an inhibitor of lactate transport (4CIN), or an inhibitor of lactate dehydrogenase, oxamate (OX), into the VMH prior to inducing hypoglycemia.
To assess whether lactate contributes to raising GABA in RH and diabetes, we injected 4CIN or OX into the VMH of RH and diabetic rats before inducing hypoglycemia.
Mechanistically, we show that the protective effect of IL-22 on pancreatitis was mediated via the induction of Bcl-2 and Bcl-X(L), which bind to Beclin-1 and subsequently inhibit autophagosome formation to ameliorate pancreatitis.
We used genetically modified rat models to investigate the role of MYL4 in atrial cardiomyopathy.
Exome sequencing and systematic bioinformatic analyses identified a rare missense variant of MYL4 (c.31G&gt;A [p.E11K]) in a large multiplex atrial cardiomyopathy family pedigree.
MYL4 knockout rats showed a similar atrial cardiomyopathy phenotype, whereas rats with an adjacent 4-amino-acid deletion showed no phenotype.
Loss-of-function MYL4 gene variants cause progressive atrial cardiomyopathy in humans and rats.
Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have yielded variants at &gt;30 loci that associate with atrial fibrillation (AF), including rare coding mutations in the sarcomere genes MYH6 and MYL4.
We imputed these variants into 104,220 individuals down to a minor allele frequency of 0.1% and found a recessive frameshift mutation in MYL4 that causes early-onset atrial fibrillation, several mutations in ABCB4 that increase risk of liver diseases and an intronic variant in GNAS associating with increased thyroid-stimulating hormone levels when maternally inherited.
The aim of this study is to examine the mitochondrial targeting of NDUFV2 and dissect the pathogenetic mechanism of one human deletion mutation present in patients with early-onset hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and encephalopathy.
The deletion mutant mimicking the human early-onset hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and encephalopathy lacked 19-40 residues in NDUFV2 and exhibited a significant reduction in its mitochondrial targeting ability.
The results of human disease cell model established that the impairment of mitochondrial localization of NDUFV2 as a mechanistic basis for early-onset hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and encephalopathy.
A small deletion in the second intron of human NDUFV2 (IVS2+5_+8delGTAA) has been shown to cause hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and encephalomyopathy [Benit, P., Beugnot, R., Chretien, D., Giurgea, I., de Lonlay-Debeney, P., Issartel, J.P., Kerscher, S., Rustin, P., Roetig, A.
While mutations in the NDUFS3 gene thus result in Leigh syndrome, a dissimilar clinical phenotype is observed in mutations in the NDUFV2 and NDUFS2 genes, resulting in encephalomyopathy and cardiomyopathy.
Combination of denaturing high performance liquid chromatography and sequence analysis allowed us to show that a 4-bp deletion in intron 2 (IVS2+5_+8delGTAA) of the NDUFV2 gene (encoding NADH dehydrogenase ubiquinone flavoprotein 2) causes complex I deficiency and early onset hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with trunk hypotonia in three affected sibs of a consanguineous family.
While mutation in a number of genes encoding complex I subunits essentially result in neurological symptoms, this first mutation in NDUFV2 is strikingly associated with cardiomyopathy, as previously observed in the unique case of NDFUS2 mutations.
Mice were fed a high fat diet to cause diet-induced obesity (DIO) and then administered GALP intranasally for 2 weeks (experimental), or vehicle (control).
GAL and GALP concentrations may be taken as potential biomarkers to predict development of obesity.
Galanin-like peptide (GALP) has an anti-obesity effect in rats and mice.
These results suggest that intranasal administration is an effective route whereby GALP can exert its effect as an anti-obesity drug.
These results show that GALP stimulates fatty acid Beta-oxidation in liver and lipolysis in adipose tissue, and suggest that the anti-obesity effect of GALP may be due to anorexigenic actions and improvement of lipid metabolism in peripheral tissues via the sympathetic nervous system.
We conclude that GALP may be of therapeutic value for obesity and life-style-related diseases in the near future.
Galanin-like peptide (GALP) shows potential as a therapeutic in the treatment of obesity and related conditions.
Variations within the gene locus encoding SHP-2 have been associated with increased susceptibility to develop ulcerative colitis and gastric atrophy.
When we considered the host genetic effects alone, gene-gene interactions consistently decreased the risks of gastric cancer and/or atrophic gastritis, including three two-way interactions: PGC rs6912200-PTPN11 rs12229892, PGC rs4711690-IL1B rs1143623 and PTPN11 rs12229892-IL1B rs1143623 and a three-way interaction: PGC rs4711690-PGC rs6912200-PTPN11 rs12229892.
Inconsistency of reported associations of the G/A polymorphism (rs2301756) in the PTPN11 gene and gastric atrophy prompted us to undertake a meta-analysis.
Associations of PTPN11 polymorphism with gastric atrophy in H. pylori (-) and (+) subjects are more readily interpreted in the homozygous and recessive models given that the dominant codominant effects skirted null associations.
Evidence of overall and subgroup decreased risks, strong in seropositive subjects, demonstrates protective effects of the PTPN11 G/A polymorphism from gastric atrophy.
The interaction between Src homology 2 domain-containing protein tyrosine phosphatase (SHP-2) of gastric epithelial cells and cagA from H. pylori plays a crucial role in developments of gastric atrophy and gastric cancer.
This study aimed to investigate the association of haplotype tagging SNPs (htSNPs) in the PTPN11 gene encoding SHP-2 with gastric atrophy and gastric cancer in Chinese population.
Our study provides the first evidence that rs12423190 polymorphism of the PTPN11 gene is significantly associated with an increased risk of gastric atrophy in H. pylori infected Chinese Han population, suggesting that rs12423190 polymorphism could be used as a useful marker of genetic susceptibility to gastric atrophy among H. pylori infected subjects.
The present study indicated that overexpression of GRP78 in colon cancer cells could promote cell-matrix adhesion through the upregulation of fibronectin, integrin-Beta1 and phosphorylated FAK.
Collectively, our results suggest that berberine-induced AMPK activation inhibits the metastatic potential of colon cancer cells by decreasing integrin Beta1 protein levels and downstream signaling.
On multivariate analysis, the independent predictors of gene expression were hepatitis C (Mx1, OAS2, PKR and IFI16), donor age (IFI16) and recipient gender (IRF7A) (P &lt; .05 for all).
No significant difference was observed in the expression of ERRbeta mRNA between endometrial carcinoma (23%, 0.21 +/- 0.16) and normal endometrium (22%, 0.27 +/- 0.15; P &gt; 0.05).
Patients undergoing major open vascular surgery (open abdominal aortic aneurysm [oAAA] repair, aortofemoral bypass, and lower extremity infrainguinal bypass [LEB]) were identified using the Michigan Surgical Quality Collaborative (MSQC) between July 2012 and June 2015.
Beta blocker utilization (&lt;1 month preoperative versus chronic) and POMI rates were prospectively collected for patients undergoing open abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) repair (n = 926) and lower extremity bypass (LEB; n = 2,123) from 2003 through 2008.
We studied 10,081 patients who underwent nonemergent carotid endarterectomy (CEA; n = 5293), lower extremity bypass (LEB; n = 2673), endovascular abdominal aortic aneurysm repair (EVAR; n = 1005), and open infrarenal abdominal aortic aneurysm repair (OAAA; n = 1,110) within the VSGNE from 2003 to 2008.
We mailed a survey to the directors of the 8 Canadian vascular surgery training programs, to ascertain the yearly operative volumes of their 3 most recent trainees with respect to 6 index operations: carotid endarterectomy (CEA), types I-IV thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm (TAA) repair, elective open infrarenal aortic aneurysm (eAAA) repair, ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm (rAAA) repair, endovascular abdominal aortic aneurysm repair (EVAR) and lower extremity arterial bypass (LEB).
Between 1999 and 2002, vascular surgery trainees in Canadian training programs were exposed to the following yearly clinical volumes (expressed as mean [and standard deviation]): CEA 55.4 (33.9), TAA 6.2 (3.8), eAAA 63.8 (30.0), rAAA 13.5 (9.4), EVAR 14.9 (9.6) and LEB 74.5 (34.5).
The range of yearly clinical volumes were: CEA 21-124, TAA 1-18, eAAA 30-133, rAAA 3-45, EVAR 0-34 and LEB 20-143.
Risk-adjustment models have not been developed for elective abdominal aortic aneurysm repair (AAA), lower extremity bypass revascularization (LEB), or lower extremity amputation (AMP).
Postoperative ileus is accompanied by activation of CGRP, NGF-TrkA, and PAR-2 in DRGs.
The present study by examining the mRNA and/or protein levels of TrkA and TrkB in the distal colon and in colonic primary afferent neurons in the dorsal root ganglia (DRG) during colitis demonstrated that colitis elicited location-specific changes in the mRNA and protein levels of TrkA and TrkB in colonic primary sensory pathways.
In colitis both the TrkA and TrkB protein levels were increased in the L1 and S1 DRGs in a time-dependent manner; however, the level of TrkB mRNA but not TrkA mRNA was increased in these DRGs.
Further experiments showed that colitis facilitated a retrograde transport of TrkA protein toward and an anterograde transport of TrkA mRNA away from the DRG, which may contribute to the increased TrkA mRNA level in the distal colon during colitis.
Double staining showed that the expression of TrkA but not TrkB was increased in the specifically labeled colonic afferent neurons in the L1 and S1 DRGs during colitis; this increase in TrkA level was attenuated by pretreatment with resiniferatoxin.
These results suggested that colitis-induced primary afferent activation involved retrograde transport of TrkA but not TrkB from the distal colon to primary afferent neurons in DRG.
In fact, receptor rearrangements or point mutations convert RET and NTRK1 in dominantly acting transforming genes leading to thyroid tumors, whereas inactivating mutations, associated with Hirschsprung's disease (HSCR) and congenital insensitivity to pain with anhidrosis (CIPA), impair RET and NTRK1 functions, respectively.
Thus, our results corroborate that therapeutic strategies based on the modulation of CCR1/CCR5-mediated cell migration and/or effector function may contribute to cardiac tissue damage limitation during chronic Chagas disease.
The results of integrated analysis explored 3 OA-related pathways (rheumatoid arthritis, osteoclast differentiation and ECM-receptor interaction) and 4 candidate genes of OA (BST2, HDAC4, ITGB2 and VCAM1) that may be therapeutic targets.
The patient showed moderate expression of CD18 in neutrophils with a homozygous splice mutation with c.41_c.58+2dup20 of ITGB2 and experienced recurrent severe infections complicated with systemic lupus erythematosus.
She received hematopoietic stem cell transplantation from a matched elder brother with heterozygous mutation of ITGB2, and has since remained free of infection and systemic lupus erythematosus symptoms without immunosuppression therapy.
Using mice deficient in all beta2 integrins (CD18 null mice), we demonstrate that expression of these heterodimeric adhesion molecules is critical for arthritis induction in the K/B x N serum transfer model.
Using null-allele mice and blocking mAbs, we demonstrate specifically that CD11a/CD18 (LFA-1) is absolutely required for the development of arthritis in this model.
Thus, key proteins in Alzheimer Disease and Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), including amyloid-Beta precursor protein, Tau and superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1), spread to adjacent cells in their misfolded aggregated forms and exhibit template-directed misfolding to induce further misfolding, disruptions to proteostasis and toxicity.
The method is useful for identifying the defective APP-mRNA isoform in LND patients, and in neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative disorders in which the APP gene is involved in the pathogenesis of diseases such as autism, fragile X syndrome, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and Alzheimer's disease, and may pave the way for new strategies applicable to rational antisense drugs design.
Several findings suggest that the amyloid precursor protein (APP) and the amyloid cascade may play a role in motor neuron disease (MND).
Considering that dementia is one of the most frequent non-motor symptoms in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and that hippocampus is one of the brain areas with greater presence of amyloid-related changes in neurodegenerative diseases, our aim was to analyze the molecular markers of the amyloid cascade of APP in pathology studies of the hippocampus of autopsied patients with ALS and ALS-frontotemporal dementia (FTD).
Immunohistochemical studies and confocal microscopy were used to analyze the expression of APP, TDP-43, pho-TDP-43, ABeta, APP intracellular cytoplasmatic domain (AICD) peptide, Fe65 protein, and pho-TAU in the hippocampus of seven patients with ALS, two patients with ALS-FTD, and four controls.
These results suggest that Sidt2(-/-) mice had spontaneous nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) accompanied by ERS.
Intraperitoneal and oral glucose tolerance tests in Sidt2 knockout mice indicated glucose intolerance and decreased serum insulin level.
For example, CDH15 and PCDH19 are associated with cognitive impairment; CDH5, CDH8, CDH9, CDH10, CDH13, CDH15, PCDH10, PCDH19 and PCDHb4 with autism; CDH7, CDH12, CDH18, PCDH12 and FAT with bipolar disease and schizophrenia; and CDH11, CDH12 and CDH13 with methamphetamine and alcohol dependency.
The UCNs emitting UV/blue and green/red multiband light were used to activate the photoresponsive Azo and photosensitizer RB molecules; The mesoporous silica shell offered the possibilities to load anticancer drug and conjugate the light triggers; As there are strong charge interaction and hydrogen bonds between Dox and surface silanols of mesoporous silica, the azobenzene molecules worked as "gatekeeper" and "molecular stirrer" to precisely trap and propel the release of Dox under the external stimuli.
UCN1 is significantly reduced in endometrial adenocarcinoma compared to healthy controls.
UCN1 suppressed migration of endometrial cancer cells in vitro.
We demonstrate that UCN1 significantly suppresses the migration of endometrial cancer cells but has no effect on their proliferation.
Thus, loss of UCN1 in endometrial cancer may promote invasion and metastatic spread.
Seven pathogenic variants leading to NSHL have so far been reported on two mitochondrial genes: MT-RNR1 encoding 12SrRNA and MT-TS1 encoding tRNA for Ser((UCN)) .
This study examines the role of FcgammaRIIB in the initiation of allergic rhinitis in mice.
These results suggest that FcgammaRIIB plays a regulatory role in the initiation of allergic rhinitis that is independent of either mouse strain or type of sensitization.
This study evaluated the interaction of radiation therapy (RT) and radiofrequency kyphoplasty (RFK) in the treatment of myeloma associated VCF.
Eighty-six myeloma patients with VCF were treated with RFK followed by radiation therapy (RFK group) or vice versa (RT group).
RFK is an effective method for treating VCF in myeloma patients independent of treatment order with regard to radiation therapy.
We investigated the involvement of RFK in cisplatin resistance using human prostate cancer PC3 cells.
The present study suggests that RFK expression is involved not only in cellular protection from oxidative stress but also in malignant progression of prostate cancer.
The anti-cancer effect of ATF-Fc (alone and in combination with trastuzumab) on tumor cells and in a nude mouse tumor model was evaluated by detecting the expression of uPA, urokinase plasminogen activator receptor (uPAR) and HER-2.
The ability of HMGA1 to regulate the plasminogen activator system may constitute an important mechanism by which HMGA1 promotes cancer progression.
KCNJ1 variation is associated with multiple diseases, such as antenatal Bartter syndrome and diabetes.
Neither diabetes mellitus nor Tempol altered Kir1.1, Kir2.1, Kir6.1, or SUR2B protein levels in renal cortical microvessels.
To the extent that the effects of Tempol reflect its antioxidant actions, our observations indicate that oxidative stress contributes to the exaggerated impact of Kir1.1, Kir2.1, and K(ATP) channels on afferent arteriolar tone during diabetes mellitus and that this phenomenon involves posttranslational modulation of channel function.
Furthermore, results suggested that co-exposure exacerbated the activation of TRPV1 signal pathways, with an enhancement in substance P and calcitonin gene-related peptide production, which contributed to inflammation in asthma by neurogenic inflammation.
It is concluded that co-exposure to PM2.5 and FA exacerbated allergic asthma through oxidative stress and enhanced TRPV1 activation.
In this review we will summarize recent evidence for an involvement of TRP channels (TRPA1, TRPC4, TRPC6, TRPV1, TRPV4, TRPM2 and TRPM8) expressed in the lung in pathways of toxin sensing and as mediators of lung inflammation and associated diseases like asthma, COPD, lung fibrosis and edema formation.
Our purpose was to investigate the regulatory mechanism of TRPV1 and related cytokines on children bronchial asthma.
Logistic regression analysis further demonstrated that TRPV1 mRNA level, EOS, IL-4 and IL-5 may be risk factors for children bronchial asthma.
The preliminary regulatory network of TRPV1 and related cytokines on children bronchial asthma established in this study provides certain theoretical basis for pathogenesis and treatment of children bronchial asthma.
oleoylethanolamide, sphingosine-1-phosphate, N-palmitoyltaurine) were postulated to be involved in activating the transient receptor potential vanilloid type 1 (TRPV1) receptor, driving TRPV1-dependent pathogenesis in asthma.Our findings suggest that asthma is characterised by a modest systemic metabolic shift in a disease severity-dependent manner, and that steroid treatment significantly affects metabolism.
To investigate the effects of particulate matter &lt;= 2.5 microns (PM2.5) on asthma-related phenotypes and on lung expression of TRPA1 and TRPV1 proteins in a mouse model of asthma.
PM2.5 exacerbates effects of asthma in this model, possibly by regulating TRPA1 and TRPV1 and the relevant neurokines.
Our results show that CM Tln2 is essential for proper Beta1D-integrin expression and that Tln1 can substitute for Tln2 in preserving heart function, but that loss of all Tln forms from the heart-muscle cell leads to myocyte instability and a dilated cardiomyopathy.
The levels of two miRNAs, hsa-miR-132-5p and hsa-miR-221-5p, were inversely correlated with the expression of CYP1A2 mRNA transcripts in normal human liver tissue samples represented in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) dataset.
In situ hybridization and functional experiments in a panel of colorectal cancer cell lines and xenografts further clarified the role of clinical relevant miRNAs.Results: Six miRNAs (miR-92b-3p, miR-188-3p, miR-221-5p, miR-331-3p, miR-425-3p, and miR-497-5p) were identified as strong predictors of survival in the screening cohort.
Particularly, CLN1, CLN2 and CLN3 were obtained by adding derivatives C1, C2 or C3 during nanoparticles preparation, while CLN2-Pt were obtained by treating preformed CLN2 with Pt(II).
As determined by ICP-OES, a content of P and Pt 2.2-fold and 2.5-fold higher in CLN2-Pt than in CLN3 was evidenced.
In fact, the antiproliferative activity shown by CLN3, CLN2-Pt on the three model cancer cell lines was substantially similar and comparable to that of complex C3 in dmso solution.
Separate prediction models which could predict consumption of each blood component in intra and postoperative phase of LDLT were derived from among the preoperative Hb, Hct, model for end-stage liver disease (MELD) score, body surface area (BSA), Plt, T. proteins, S. creatinine, B. urea, INR, and serum sodium and chloride.
No association with vitiligo was found for the MECL1 gene, which encodes a third immunoproteasome subunit and is unlinked to the MHC class II region.
We report a novel LHX3 mutation, which is associated with combined pituitary hormone deficiency including ACTH deficiency, short neck, and sensorineural hearing loss.
So-called stress hormones, like adrenocorticotropic hormone, cortisol, and antidiuretic hormone, are released concomitant with nausea and vomiting in motion sickness, but do not seem to be involved in the aetiology of motion sickness.
MMP-1/7 serum levels were measured using Luminex xMAP technology in 139 patients- 47 IPF, 36 non-IPF Usual Interstitial Pneumonia (UIP), 14 idiopathic Nonspecific Interstitial Pneumonia (iNSIP), 29 secondary NSIP (secNSIP), 13 stage IV sarcoidosis- and 20 healthy controls, and compared using the Mann-Whitney U test.
This activity is regulated by such inhibitors as metalloprvteinase 1 tissue inhibitor and cystatin C. The comparative analysis was applied concerning matrix metalloproteinase 1 precursor; metalloproteinase I tissue inhibitor and cystatin C--indicators of conditions of the "proteolysis-antiproteolysis" system in the bronchoalveolar secretion of patients with chronic obstructive lung disease, bronchial asthma and pneumonia.
To observe the effects of Dureping Injection on the contents of matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) and tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinase-1 (TIMP-1) in the lung tissue of mice with pneumonia of influenza virus infection.
We developed a Korean version of the NPI-Q (KNPI-Q) and compared subitems with those of the Korean version of the NPI (KNPI) in 63 dementia patients; 47 patients had been diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease with dementia, 8 with vascular dementia, and 8 with dementia with Lewy body disease.
All patients received the Korean version of the Mini-Mental State Examination and the Clinical Dementia Rating within 1 month of the KNPI-Q.
The KNPI-Q is a reliable and brief instrument that can be employed for screening in the evaluation of neuropsychiatric symptoms of dementia and associated caregiver distress.
The cognitive function of each sub-domain, functional impairments, depressive symptoms, and caregiver burden were assessed using the dementia version of Seoul Neuropsychological Screening Battery (SNSB-D), Barthel Index for Daily Living Activities (ADL), Seoul-Instrumental Activities of Daily Living (S-IADL), the Clinical Dementia Rating Sum of Box (CDR-SB), the Global Deterioration Scale (GDS), the Korean version of the Neuropsychiatric Inventory (K-NPI), and the 15-item Geriatric Depression Scale.
Our primary endpoints were change from baseline to weeks 12 and 24 in the Seoul Neuropsychological Screening Battery-Dementia version (SNSB-D) and the Korean version of neuropsychiatric inventory (K-NPI).
The patients were also evaluated using the Korean version of the Severe Impairment Battery (SIB-Ko), Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR), Global Deterioration Scale (GDS), Barthel Activities of Daily Living (B-ADL), the Korean version of the Instrumental Activities of Daily Living (K-IADL), the Korean version of the Neuropsychiatric Inventory (K-NPI) and the Functional Assessment Staging (FAST).
The aim of this study is to develop the Korean version of the NPI (K-NPI) and to test its reliability and usefulness in dementia patients.
Total K-NPI scores correlated positively with dementia severity assessed with the Korean Mini-Mental State Examination.
The K-NPI, whose reliability and competency are comparable to those of the original version, may be a reliable and useful tool for measuring neuropsychiatric disturbances in Korean dementia patients.
Bone and cartilage and their disorders are addressed under the following headings: functions of bone; normal and abnormal bone remodeling; osteopetrosis and osteoporosis; epithelial-mesenchymal interaction, condensation and differentiation; osteoblasts, markers of bone formation, osteoclasts, components of bone, and pathology of bone; chondroblasts, markers of cartilage formation, secondary cartilage, components of cartilage, and pathology of cartilage; intramembranous and endochondral bone formation; RUNX genes and cleidocranial dysplasia (CCD); osterix; histone deacetylase 4 and Runx2; Ligand to receptor activator of NFkappaB (RANKL), RANK, osteoprotegerin, and osteoimmunology; WNT signaling, LRP5 mutations, and beta-catenin; the role of leptin in bone remodeling; collagens, collagenopathies, and osteogenesis imperfecta; FGFs/FGFRs, FGFR3 skeletal dysplasias, craniosynostosis, and other disorders; short limb chondrodysplasias; molecular control of the growth plate in endochondral bone formation and genetic disorders of IHH and PTHR1; ANKH, craniometaphyseal dysplasia, and chondrocalcinosis; transforming growth factor beta, Camurati-Engelmann disease (CED), and Marfan syndrome, types I and II; an ACVR1 mutation and fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva; MSX1 and MSX2: biology, mutations, and associated disorders; G protein, activation of adenylyl cyclase, GNAS1 mutations, McCune-Albright syndrome, fibrous dysplasia, and Albright hereditary osteodystrophy; FLNA and associated disorders; and morphological development of teeth and their genetic mutations.
Genome-wide analysis showed an association of asthma in Russians with the polymorphic loci of gene MUC19 (12q12) encoding gel-forming mucin 19.
Seven polymorphic loci of gene MUC19 (rs1492313, rs2588401, rs2588402, rs2638863, rs2638864, rs1352940, and rs2933373), which are in close linkage disequilibrium among themselves and rs2933346, are associated with asthma with the same p-value (p = 4.96 x 10(-6)).
According to our data, the association of polymorphic variants of gene MUC19 with asthma has not been previously identified in any study.
Our results indicate the important role of polymorphic variants of gene MUC19 in the formation of a predisposition to the development of asthma in individuals of Russian ethnicity.
To detect the mucin gene (MUC2, MUC5AC, MUC5B, MUC18 and MUC19) expression in the nasal polyps, allergic rhinitis (AR) and the normal nasal mucosa in human.
It indicates that the secretion of MUC19 in allergic rhinitis was on high level.
We aimed to assess the impact of hypocretin deficiency on attentional functioning by comparing performances on the attention network test (ANT) of narcoleptic patients with hypocretin deficiency (narcolepsy type 1-NT1) versus patients without hypocretin deficiency (narcolepsy type 2-NT2) and healthy controls.
A randomized, double-blind prospective trial among recent onset type 1 diabetes patients has been designed using Cyclosporine A and a proton-pump inhibitor, which increases gastrin levels and has been shown to work through the Reg receptor to transform pancreatic duct cells into islets.
In the A(1)AR agonist area, clinical candidates have been discovered for the following conditions: atrial arrhythmias (tecadenoson, selodenoson and PJ-875); Type II diabetes and insulin sensitizing agents (GR79236, ARA, RPR-749, and CVT-3619); and angina (BAY 68-4986).
The treatment of type II diabetes using A(1)AR agonists in the clinic has met with limited success due to cardiovascular side effects and a well-defined desensitization of full agonists in human trials (GR79236, ARA, and RPR 749).
Reg protein acts as an autocrine/paracrine growth factor to induce beta-cell replication via the Reg receptor and ameliorates experimental diabetes.
We have demonstrated in vitro and in vivo that the exogenous addition of rat and human Reg gene products, Reg/REG proteins, induced beta-cell replication via the Reg receptor and thereby ameliorated experimental diabetes.
From the regenerating islet-derived cDNA library we isolated Reg (Regenerating Gene) and demonstrated that Reg protein induces beta-cell replication via the Reg receptor and ameliorates experimental diabetes.
Genomic DNA was isolated from patients with hypopituitarism to amplify and sequence eight pituitary specific transcription factors (HESX1, LHX3, LHX4, OTX2, PITX2, POU1F1, PROP1, and SIX6).
Rat insulinoma INS-1E cells and mouse beta-TC3 cells stably expressing Gadd45b were generated.
To define the genetic landscape of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and assess the contribution of possible oligogenic inheritance, we aimed to comprehensively sequence 17 known ALS genes in 391 ALS patients from the United States.
High nuclear ATF2 expression was mainly observed in translocation-associated and/or spindle cell sarcomas including synovial sarcoma, desmoplastic small round cell tumor, endometrial stromal sarcoma, gastrointestinal stromal tumor, malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor, and solitary fibrous tumor.
SIRT1 immunoreactivity was reviewed in a series of 164 soft tissue tumors including alveolar soft part sarcoma, angiomyolipoma, clear cell sarcoma, desmoid/fibromatosis, desmoplastic small round cell tumor, Ewing sarcoma, gastrointestinal stromal tumor, glomus tumor, leiomyoma, leiomyosarcoma, lipoma, liposarcoma, malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor, nodular fasciitis, osteosarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, schwannoma, solitary fibrous tumor, synovial sarcoma, undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma, and Wilms tumor.
Pathologic diagnosis of CD117-negative GISTs can be facilitated with the application of a panel of immunohistochemical markers, including DOG-1 and WT-1.
In this study, WT-1 immunoreactivity was explored in 97 gastrointestinal stromal tumours (GISTs).
The expression of WT-1 was compared with other immunohistochemical markers of GIST and the association with clinicopathological features was also evaluated.
All 97 GISTs were positive for WT-1 and the staining intensity was strong in 59 (60.8%), moderate in 28 (28.9%) and weak in 10 cases (10.3%).
Although the biological roles of WT-1 in GIST are still unknown, our findings might provide a rationale for immunotherapy targeting WT-1 and a therapeutic solution to the challenge of imatinib-resistant GISTs.
WT-1 immunoreactivity in gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST) was currently not known.
We, therefore, investigated the expression of WT-1 in GIST in comparison to other soft tissue tumors by immunohistochemistry and Western blot analysis.
We found that all 28 cases (100%) of GIST are positive for WT-1, diffusely (&gt;75%, 3+) in 13 (46.4%) cases, moderately (26% to 75%, 2+) in 13 (46.4%) cases, and focally (5% to 25%, 1+) in 2 (7.2%) cases.
The significance of cytoplasmic expression of WT-1 in GIST and some smooth muscle tumors is unclear and warrant further investigation.
The potential roles of WT-1 in the diagnosis and treatment of GIST were discussed.
This review will discuss five types of sarcoma that display aberrant tyrosine kinase pathway signaling: gastrointestinal stromal tumor, inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor, congenital fibrosarcoma and mesoblastic nephroma, dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans, and desmoplastic small round cell tumor; one sarcoma predisposition syndrome with specific dysregulation of the ras pathway--neurofibromatosis--will also be discussed.
An additional 80 endometrial cancer patients were studied for RAB32 methylation and MSI status.
In contrast, RAB32 methylation occurred in only 1 of 80 endometrial cancers, including 20 MSI-H, 8 MSI-L and 52 MSS tumors.
We conclude that although RAB32 methylation is rare in endometrial cancers, it is strongly associated with hMLH1 hypermethylation and MSI in gastric adenocarcinomas.
Panel, consisting of 16 new potential markers for early and differentiated diagnosis of prostatic gland cancer, was identified: BHLHE40, FOXP1, LOC285205, ITGA9, CTDSPL, FGF12, LOC440944/SETD5, VHL, CLCN2, OSBPL10/ZNF860, LMCD1, FAM19A4, CAND2, MAP4, KY and LRRC58.
However, there is little information about the involvement of MAP4 in human cancer.
Here we show that MAP4 serves as a regulator of invasion and migration in esophageal squamous cancer cells.
The fusion between echinoderm microtubule-associated protein 4 (EML4) and anaplastic lymphatic tumor kinase (ALK) rearrangement is present in approximately 5% of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients.
##### ##########4 (echinoderm microtubule-associated protein 4, EML4) ######### (anaplastic lymphatic tumor kinase, ALK) ##############5%####### (non-small cell lung cancer, NSCLC) ###, ########## (epidermal growth factor receptor, EGFR) #K-ras##################EML4-ALK#####NSCLC####ALK######, ###########80%, ##############NSCLC##EML4-ALK#######, ########################### (immunohistochemistry, IHC) ##EML4-ALK##############, ###############, #######"#######"####### ##Pubmed################, #######2015#2#25#, ################, ######meta####, #############"###"###### (fluorescence in situ hybridization, FISH) #########, ########IHC############# ##11#####meta##, EML4-ALK############3,234#, ##### (diagnositic odds ratio, DOR) #1,135.00 (95%CI: 337.10-3,821.46) ############  (summary receiver operating characteristic curve, SROC) ####0.992,3 (SEAUC=0.003,2) , Q*####0.964,4 (SEQ*=0.008,7) ### #####IHC###EML4-ALK#########, ##########, ##############, #########.
Based on these data, we proposed the set of potential biomarkers for detection of prostate cancer and discrimination between prostate tumors with different malignancy and aggressiveness: BHLHE40, FOXP1, LOC285205, ITGA9, CTDSPL, FGF12, LOC440944/SETD5, VHL, CLCN2, OSBPL10/ZNF860, LMCD1, FAM19A4, CAND2, MAP4, KY, and LRRC58.
We also analyzed gene expression of MAP4 in 34 patients with bladder cancer using immunohistochemical staining assay.
We used cAMP elevators and small interfering RNA of MAP4 here, found that both of them can potently inhibit the invasion and the migration of bladder cancer cells by disrupting microtubule (MT) cytoskeleton.
Consistently, the bladder cancer grade is positively correlated with the protein level of MAP4.
Our results indicated that the cAMP/PKA signaling pathway might inhibit bladder cancer cell invasion by targeting MAP4-dependent microtubule dynamics, which could be exploited for the therapy of invasive bladder cancer.
Irritable bowel syndrome symptoms consistently improved after 3 weeks of LFD, and significantly more participants reported symptom relief in response to placebo (80%) than FOS (30%).
Children with congenital esophageal atresia (EA) and tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) have chronic respiratory symptoms including recurrent pneumonia, wheezing and persistent cough.
Adult patients experiencing symptoms of cough and recurrent aspiration pneumonia should be evaluated for congenital TEF.
Our patient underwent primary repair of OA/TEF malformations, which was later complicated by pneumonia and a recurrent TEF.
These findings suggest that a relatively small increase in plasma TNF-Alfa, and decreases in urine TNF-Alfa, GM-CSF, and IL-15 from just before to just after the diagnosis of pneumonia could be markers for an increased risk of PUs in individuals with pneumonia after traumatic SCI.
The study aimed to investigate the innate cytokine interleukin-15 (IL-15) as a marker of disease severity.A prospective single-centre observational study was conducted in a university-affiliated paediatric teaching hospital, comparing children (0-18 months) hospitalised for viral bronchiolitis, those admitted to the paediatric intensive care unit with severe disease and healthy age-matched controls.
Peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMC) IL-15 mRNA expression was significantly higher in those with moderate severity bronchiolitis compared with controls and those with severe disease.
Targets of de-regulated miRNA were differentially expressed in bronchiolitis, including JAK3, STAT5A and NFKB1 on the IL-15 signalling pathway.IL-15 is associated with disease severity in children hospitalised with viral bronchiolitis.
The present study aimed to investigate the role of Interleukin 15 (IL-15) in protein degradation in skeletal muscle mediated by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway (UPP) in a rat model of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
Patients with SWA were older at seizure diagnosis than those with SA (p=0.04), were less often referred for evaluation of seizures or epilepsy (p=0.04), and were referred faster for VEM, despite SWA were significantly less likely to include motor manifestations (p=0.0004).
We suggest that patients with SWA have a unique epilepsy syndrome.
Achilles tendon (T) and Hoffmann (H) reflexes were evoked during spike and wave activity (SWA) in 6 patients with generalized epilepsy, selected on the basis of their photosensitivity.
Partial epilepsy after shunting manifested itself in 15 patients, but this did not correlate with the side of the shunt or with the side of the SWA in the EEG.
We hypothesized that the NDI may be due to of severe hypokalemia induced tubular dysfunction.
Previously, we reported an increase of V1aR mRNA and a decrease of V2R mRNA in the collecting ducts under chronic metabolic acidosis.
Patients with moderate to severe nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy (NPDR) had POBF 18% higher than the control (mean OBF, 943 microL/min).
Among PRP-treated subjects with PDR, ocular blood flow was 22% below the control (mean OBF, 619 microL/min), and 34% less than moderate to severe nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy.
Diabetic patients with no retinopathy or mild NPDR had OBF indistinguishable from the control (785 vs. 797 microL/min).
POBF is unaffected early in diabetic retinopathy, but increases significantly in eyes with moderate to severe NPDR.
These experimental data represent the largest published assessment of POBF in NPDR.
POBF in the patients with non-exudative and exudative age related macular degeneration (AMD) was investigated.
The POBF increased but was still below normal levels at the NPDR stage, and then increased to an above normal level in the PPDR/PDR stage of diabetic retinopathy.
Right before and one month after this fourth vaccine dose, the avidity of IgG antibodies against diphtheria toxin (DT), tetanus toxin (TT), pertussis toxin (PT), filamentous hemagglutinin (FHA) and pertactin (Prn) was determined using 1.5 M ammonium thiocyanate as dissociating agent.
Immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibodies against pertussis toxin (PT), filamentous hemagglutinin (FHA), pertactin (Prn), tetanus toxoid (TT), and diphtheria toxoid (DT) were measured using commercially available enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA).
We have developed a magnetic bead-based pentaplex immunoassay (MIA) for the simultaneous detection of IgG antibodies against diphtheria toxin (DT), tetanus toxin (TT), pertussis toxin (PT), filamentous hemagglutinin (FHA) and pertactin (Prn).
Immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibodies against pertussis toxin (PT), filamentous hemagglutinin (FHA), pertactin (Prn), tetanus toxoid (TT) and diphtheria toxoid (DT) were measured using commercially available ELISA tests.
Antibody geometric mean concentrations (GMCs) against tetanus (TT), diphtheria (DT), pertussis toxin (PT), filamentous haemagglutinin (FHA) and pertactin (Prn) were measured with commercial ELISA tests in samples taken preceding maternal vaccination and one month afterwards, at delivery and from the cord blood, and in infants before and 1 month after the primary series of 3 pertussis containing hexavalent vaccines.
Immunoglobulin G (IgG) against tetanus (TT), diphtheria (DT), pertussis toxin (PT), filamentous hemaglutinin (FHA) and pertactin (Prn) were measured using commercial ELISA tests, at baseline, 1 month after maternal vaccination, at delivery, and in infants from cord blood and before and after the primary series (EPI: month 2-3-4) of a pertussis containing vaccine.
Anti-Pertussis Toxin (PT), filamentous hemagglutinin (FHA), pertactin (Prn), tetanus toxin (TT) and diphtheria toxin (DT) antibodies were measured by ELISA.
Geometric mean titers were not different after prebiotic supplementation at 5 months, Ptx (37/44 EU/ml), FHA (78/96 EU/ml), Prn (78/80 EU/ml), Diphtheria (0.40/0.57 IU/ml), Tetanus (0.74/0.99 IU/ml) and Hib (0.35/0.63 myg/ml), and at 12 months Ptx (55/66 EU/ml), FHA (122/119 EU/ml), Prn (116/106 Eu/ml), Diphtheria (0.88/1.11 IU/ml), Tetanus (1.64/1.79 IU/ml) and Hib (2.91/2.55 myg/ml).
This multiplex immunoassay (MIA) can simultaneously determine levels of specific mouse serum IgG antibodies to P antigens P.69 pertactin (P.69 Prn), filamentous hemagglutinin (FHA), pertussis toxin (Ptx), and combined fimbria type 2 and 3 antigens (Fim2/3) and to diphtheria toxin (Dtx) and tetanus toxin (TT) in a single well.
Our recent study showed reduced G protein Gamma2 subunit (Gng2/GNG2) expression levels in malignant melanoma cells compared with those in benign melanocytic cells in both mice and humans.
Our recent study also showed that reduced GNG2 alone augmented proliferation of malignant melanoma cells.
To our knowledge, however, there is no evidence showing an effect of Gng2/GNG2 alone on metastasis of any cancers including malignant melanoma.
In his study, we first prepared GNG2-overexpressed SK-Mel28 human malignant melanoma cells, in which GNG2 protein expression level was undetectably low.
Migration and invasion activities of the GNG2-overexpressed malignant melanoma cells were suppressed up to 1/10th, with decreased activity of focal adhesion kinase (FAK).
Taken together, our results suggest that overexpression of GNG2 alone inhibits metastasis in human malignant melanoma cells with decreased FAK activity.
Thus, GNG2 might be a candidate of molecular targets of prevention and therapy for metastasis of malignant melanoma.
Our recent study showed reduced G protein Gamma2 subunit (Gng2/GNG2) expression levels in malignant melanoma cells compared with those in benign melanocytic cells in both mice and humans.
At present, however, there is no evidence showing an effect of Gng2/GNG2 alone on cancer biology.
The purpose of this study was to examine the biological significance of GNG2 in human malignant melanoma cells.
Levels of proliferation and activities of signal transduction molecules were examined in both GNG2-overexpressed and -depleted human malignant melanoma cells.
Proliferation of GNG2-overexpressed SK-Mel28 human malignant melanoma cells was suppressed with decreased c-SRC and AKT activities and increased p21(Cip/WAF1) expression level in vitro.
In contrast, proliferation of GNG2-depleted A375P human malignant melanoma cells was enhanced with increased c-SRC and AKT activities and decreased p21(Cip/WAF1) expression level in vitro.
We demonstrated for the first time that increased protein expression level of GNG2 alone inhibits proliferation of malignant melanoma cells in vitro and in vivo, suggesting that GNG2 could be a novel molecular target for malignant melanoma therapy.
Gng2 transcript expression levels in a malignant melanoma were less than 1/10 of the level in a benign tumor.
The difference in Gng2 transcript expression levels between benign tumors and malignant melanomas was greatest among all of the G protein Gamma subunits examined in this study.
Moreover, protein expression levels of Gng2 were decreased in malignant melanomas compared with those in benign melanocytic tumors in RET-mice.
Analysis of human malignant melanomas also showed reduced GNG2 protein expression levels in five human malignant melanoma cell lines compared with the expression levels in normal human epithelial melanocytes (NHEM).
Thus, we demonstrated for the first time that Gng2/GNG2 expression levels are reduced in malignant melanoma, suggesting that GNG2 could be a novel biomarker for malignant melanoma.
Several DNA repair enzymes are essential for comprehensive neural repair mechanisms after stroke, including PolBeta and NEIL3 for neurogenesis, APE1 for white matter repair, Gadd45b for axonal regeneration, and DNA-PKs for neurovascular remodeling.
The aims of this study are to determine the expression and the prognostic value of TFF3 in a large series of human endometrial cancer and its relation with ER.
We evaluated 328 endometrial carcinomas using TFF3 and ER antibody on paraffin-embedded tissue.
1-TFF3 seems to be a novel pathway in the pathogenesis of type I endometrial carcinomas.
2-The strong association of TFF3 and ER in the estrogen-dependent endometrioid carcinoma could explain the reason for its frequent expression by this tumor type.
3-TFF3(+) seems to forecast a good prognosis in type I endometrial carcinomas.
Based on our data, TFF3 expression in endometrial cancer deserves further investigation.
We evaluated 401 endometrial carcinomas cases by using four immunomarkers - oestrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), insulin-like growth factor II mRNA - binding protein 3 (IMP3), and intestinal trefoil factor 3 (TFF3)-on a tissue microarray.
We recommend using an ER/PR/TFF3/IMP3 immunohistochemical panel in selected cases of endometrial carcinoma where the differential diagnosis is challenging.
By RT-PCR we have confirmed complete FAM107A downregulation in laryngeal cancer cell lines (15/15) and primary tumors (21/21) and this finding was further supported by FAM107A protein immunohistochemistry (15/15).
Downregulated in renal cell carcinoma 1 (DRR1) has important roles in tumor cell growth, neuron survival and spine formation, and was recently shown to bind actin.
In addition, DRR1 and COMMD1 suppressed the cyclin D1 expression, G1/S transition and cell proliferation of neuroblastoma cells.
Consistent with these facts, low expressions of DRR1 were associated with tumorigenesis of human neuroblastoma and its mouse model.
This study has thus revealed a novel nuclear complex of F-actin, DRR1 and COMMD1 that is involved in NF-KB degradation and cell cycle suppression in neuroblastoma cells.
The aim of the present study was to analyze the expression level of FAM107A gene, a TSG located in 3p21.1, in lung cancer tumors and in tumor adjacent normal lung samples.
Promoter methylation of FAM107A gene was confirmed only in the minority of NSCLCs.
We recently characterized a stress and glucocorticoid-regulated gene, down-regulated in renal cell carcinoma - DRR1 (Fam107A).
In human, FAM107A termed TU3A/DRR1 has been reported as a candidate tumor suppressor gene which expression is downregulated in several types of cancer, however no studies have investigated the other family protein, FAM107B.
Down-regulated in renal cell carcinoma 1 (DRR1) is mapped at 3p21.1, and is a candidate tumor suppressor gene.
DRR1 was poorly expressed in established cancer cell lines, including neuroblastoma cells, whereas strong expression was observed in normal cells.
A neuroblastoma model, MYCN transgenic mice, revealed that DRR1 protein was expressed in the celiac ganglion 2 weeks after birth when neuroblast hyperplasia was also observed; however, there was no longer any expression of DRR1 protein in tumors originating from the ganglion 8 weeks after birth.
Together, our data indicate that DRR1 protein is expressed in normal cells, particularly in the nervous system during embryogenesis, is involved in neuronal cell survival, and is downregulated during neuroblastoma carcinogenesis.
TU3A, located on 3p21.1, was originally identified as a candidate tumor suppressor gene in renal cell carcinoma (RCC).
Recently, down-regulation of TU3A expression has been reported not only in RCC but also in other types of cancers.
Furthermore, we observed promoter hyper-methylation of TU3A in several types of cancer cell lines and primary cancers of the bladder and testis.
To our knowledge, the present study is the first to demonstrate the epigenetic inactivation of TU3A in human cancers.
The findings of this study warrant further study to investigate the role of TU3A methylation in cancer development.
The aim of this study was to examine the association between GCK, GCKR, FADS1, DGKB/TMEM195 and CDKAL1 gene polymorphisms and the development of gestational diabetes.
Background Familial hemiplegic migraine type 3 is a monogenic subtype of migraine caused by missense mutations in the neuronal voltage-gated sodium channel gene SCN1A, with 10 different mutations reported so far.
Results In both pedigrees, we identified SCN1A mutation p.F1499L, which has been previously associated with familial hemiplegic migraine type 3 and elicited repetitive daily blindness.
Conclusion Like a substantial proportion of other familial hemiplegic migraine type 3 mutations, p.F1499L affects the intracellular linker between domains III and IV of SCN1A, which seems to be a mutational hot-spot.
A genetic link between these two diseases is particularly evident in familial hemiplegic migraine: mutations of ATP1A2, SCN1A and CACNA1A genes, identified in this disease, have also been involved in different types of epilepsy and febrile seizures.
Mutations in three genes (CACNA1A, ATP1A2, and SCN1A) have been found to cause FHM.
Among these, nine SCN1A gene mutations were reported to cause familial hemiplegic migraine type 3 (FHM3).
Method The clinical manifestations of a Chinese FHM family were recorded and all coding exons and flanking intronic regions of the CACNA1A, ATP1A2, and SCN1A genes were tested for mutations.
Conclusion The identification of a novel mutation in the SCN1A gene in the Chinese population may further aid in the understanding of FHM genetics.
Mutations in four genes have been identified in familial hemiplegic migraine (FHM), from which CACNA1A (FHM type 1) and SCN1A (FHM type 3) code for neuronal voltage-gated calcium or sodium channels, respectively, while ATP1A2 (FHM type 2) encodes the Alfa2 isoform of the Na(+),K(+)-ATPase's catalytic subunit, thus classifying FHM primarily as an ion channel/ion transporter pathology.
Moreover, three genes (CACNA1A, ATP1A2, and SCN1A) have come from studies performed in individuals with familial hemiplegic migraine (FHM), a monogenic form of migraine with aura.
The FHM3 subtype is caused by mutations in SCN1A, which is also the most frequent epilepsy gene encoding the voltage-gated Na+ channel NaV1.1.
The aim of this study was to explore the clinical, genetic and pathogenetic features of a pure FHM3 family.
Results and conclusions We identified a novel SCN1A (p.Leu1624Pro) mutation in a pure FHM family with notably early-onset attacks at mean age of 7.
L1624P locates in S3 of domain IV, the same domain as two of four known pure FHM3 mutations.
Similar to the known FHM3 mutations, this novel mutation predicts hyperexcitability of GABAergic inhibitory neurons.
Sixty patients with migraine without aura (MO) or with different types of migraine with aura (MA), including sporadic hemiplegic, familial hemiplegic, and probable familial hemiplegic, were screened for mutations in the four genes previously linked with different types of migraine (ATP1A2, CACNA1A, SCN1A, and KCNK18).
One novel mutation in SCN1A, encoding Alfa subunit of sodium channel, causing amino acid change M1500V localized to a region encoding inactivation loop between transmembrane domains III and IV of the channel, was detected in a female FHM patient.
The presence of SCN1A mutations and absence of mutations in ATP1A2 or CACNA1A suggest that the Polish patients represent FHM type 3.
Mutations of the voltage gated Na(+) channel Na(V)1.1 (SCN1A) are important causes of different genetic epilepsies and can also cause familial hemiplegic migraine (FHM-III).
A mutation causing FHM type 3 (FHM3) has been identified in SCN1A encoding the Nav1.1 Na(+) channel.
In particular, we investigate the dynamical repertoire from normal spiking (milliseconds) to spreading depression and anoxic depolarization (tens of seconds) and show that FHM3 mutations render gray matter tissue more vulnerable to spreading depression despite opposing effects associated with action potential generation.
PAR2 gene expression correlated positively with transcript levels of IL-8, IL-1Beta as well mucosal SLPI levels in H. pylori-infected patients (r: 0.47-0.84; p &lt; .0001), whereas no correlation was found with the degree of gastritis.
Mucosal levels of Secretory Leukocyte Protease Inhibitor (SLPI) are specifically reduced in relation to H. pylori-induced gastritis.
In contrast to other diseases, SLPI seems not to have a regulatory role for Progranulin in H. pylori-mediated gastritis.
SLPI expression is generally induced during inflammation; however, Helicobacter pylori-mediated gastritis is associated with significantly decreased antral SLPI levels.
SLPI expression was retrospectively analysed by immunohistochemistry in 85 paraffin-embedded samples: H. pylori-induced (n=13), non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID)-enhanced (n=18), autoimmune (n=11), lymphocytic gastritis (n=26) and H. pylori-negative controls (n=17).
In comparison with the control group, the SLPI expression of antral mucosa in H. pylori-mediated and lymphocytic gastritis was significantly lower (P&lt;0.001), whereas epithelial SLPI expression was not affected in NSAID-enhanced and autoimmune gastritis either in the antrum or corpus, respectively.
Both the H. pylori-mediated and lymphocytic gastritis revealed a significantly lower expression of SLPI in infiltrating immune cells (P&lt;0.01), whereas immune cells infiltrating the corpus in autoimmune gastritis showed higher SLPI levels than the immune cells of other groups (P&lt;0.03).
Antral SLPI levels were inversely correlated with inflammatory scores of antrum-predominant gastritis.
Pharmacological inhibition of different signaling pathways and genetic knockdown of Notch-2 further revealed JNK as an upstream effector of Notch-2 in TGF-Beta1-mediated renal fibrosis.
Consistently, we also demonstrated that administration of TSA or a Gamma-secretase inhibitor RO4929097 in the mouse model of unilateral ureteral obstruction significantly ameliorated renal fibrosis through suppression of the JNK/Notch-2 signaling activation.
Although, renal abnormalities are considered an integral part of the HJCYS, published reports on ESRD are scarce.
Here we show that Notch2 prevents podocyte loss and nephrosis.
Administration of a Notch2 agonistic monoclonal antibody ameliorates proteinuria and glomerulosclerosis in a mouse model of nephrosis and focal segmental glomerulosclerosis.
Hence, specific activation of Notch2 rescues damaged podocytes and activating Notch2 may represent a novel clinical strategy for the amelioration of nephrosis and glomerulosclerosis.
To investigate the effect of both fermented Cordyceps powder (CS) and prednisone on the Notch2/hes-1 signaling activation in the kidney tubules of rats with acute aristolochic acid nephropathy (AAAN).
The role of NOTCH2 and JAG1 in formation of proximal nephron structures and podocytes might explain the observed phenotypes of renal dysplasia and proteinuria in patients with Alagille syndrome, and renal tubular acidosis may be the result of JAG1 expression in the collecting ducts.
The oral pathogenic bacterium involved in human dental caries formation Streptococcus mutans, encodes for two carbonic anhydrase (CA, EC 4.2.1.1) one belonging to the Alfa- and the other one to the Beta-class.
Streptococcus mutans, the oral pathogenic bacterium provoking dental caries formation, encodes for a Beta-class carbonic anhydrase (CA, EC 4.2.1.1), SmuCA.
A carbonic anhydrase (CA, EC 4.2.1.1) denominated PgiCA, belonging to the Gamma-class, from the oral pathogenic bacteria Porphyromonas gingivalis, the main causative agent of periodontitis, was investigated for its inhibition profile with sulfonamides and one sulfamate.
Recently, an interaction between FIR (FUSE-Binding Protein-Interacting Repressor) and TFIIH/p89/XPB helicase was found to repress c-myc transcription and so might be important for suppressing tumor formation.
In XPB cells carrying mutant TFIIH, loop formation failed and the serum response was abnormal; RNAi depletion of FIR similarly disabled c-myc regulation.
Recently, an interaction between FUSE-binding protein-interacting repressor (FIR) and TFIIH/p89/XPB helicase was found to repress c-myc transcription and might be important for suppressing tumor formation.
Here, XPB and XPD mutations are shown to block transcription activation by the FUSE Binding Protein (FBP), a regulator of c-myc expression, and repression by the FBP Interacting Repressor (FIR).
The repression domain of FIR targeted only TFIIH's p89/XPB helicase, required at several stages in transcription, but not factors required for promoter selection.
To investigate the tissue expression and systemic levels of IL-32, as well as its cellular sources, in patients with HS in comparison with healthy donors and patients with two other inflammatory skin diseases: psoriasis and atopic dermatitis (AD).
IL-32 was upregulated in patients with HS in both lesional skin and serum when compared with healthy donors and patients with AD or psoriasis.
Using skin samples from patients with mycosis fungoides (n = 21), healthy volunteers (n = 17), and individuals with atopic dermatitis (n = 17) and psoriasis (n = 9), we found IL32 mRNA expression significantly higher in mycosis fungoides samples than in samples from benign inflammatory skin diseases, and its expression increases with disease progression.
Immunofluorescence staining demonstrated that IL-32 was expressed in AD lesional skin, whereas it was present in neither skin biopsy specimens from healthy donors nor in lesional skin from patients with psoriasis.
In this study, the expression profile of ASPP2 in choriocarcinoma was examined in comparison with normal placentas and hydatidiform moles, the latter being a type of GTD that carries malignant potential.
Downregulation of ASPP2 messenger RNA and protein was demonstrated in choriocarcinoma by quantitative PCR and immunohistochemistry.
ASPP2-transfected choriocarcinoma cells (JEG-3 and JAR) showed an increase in apoptosis and a decrease in cell migration as detected by TdT-mediated dUTP nick end labeling and wound healing assays, respectively, illustrating the complex action of ASPP2 on cell functions other than programmed cell death.
Taken together, we demonstrated a loss of tumor-suppressive ASPP2 in choriocarcinoma with effects on cell migration and apoptosis.
No correlation between erythrocyte TDP concentration and transketolase activity and/or alpha-ETK was observed in ESRD patients, either before or 10 h after administration.
Scores for VEGF, TIMP-1, TIMP-3, SLPI and PAI-1 were all increased in OA compared with PM, and higher scores were associated with greater chondropathy.
Concentrations of the plasminogen activators pro-urokinase, tissue plasminogen activator, plasminogen activator inhibitors 1 and 2 (PAI-1 and PAI-2), plasminogen, and fibrin split product D-dimer in synovial fluid (SF) and blood plasma of 29 patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) were compared with the concentrations of 18 patients with spondyloarthropathy (SpA).
Besides myeloperoxidase (MPO), which was used as the gold standard in differentiating AML from other type of ALs, the most specific markers for AML in our study were CD14 and CD64 (99.5 and 95.6%).
They were characterized as follows: (1) disease onset with initial signs/symptoms due to intractable otitis media with effusion or granulation, which did not respond to ordinary treatments such as antibiotics and insertion of tympanic ventilation tubes, followed by progressive hearing loss; (2) predominantly female (73%) and older (median age: 68 years); (3) predominantly myeloperoxidase (MPO)-ANCA-positive (60%), followed by proteinase 3 (PR3)-ANCA-positive (19%) and both ANCAs-negative (16%); (4) frequently observed accompanying facial palsy (36%) and hypertrophic pachymeningitis (28%); and (5) disease often involving lung (35%) and kidney (26%) lesions.
Effects of zolpidem were wide ranging (eg, improvement on the JFK Coma Recovery Scale-Revised, the Unified Parkinson Disease Rating Scale, and the Burke-Fahn-Marsden Dystonia Rating Scale) and generally lasted 1 to 4 hours before the participant returned to baseline.
The altered tissue steroid concentrations in endometriosis were in line with the expression of various steroidogenic enzymes in the lesions, of which HSD3B2 showed constantly high expression, whereas CYP11A1 expression was low.
Type III groups together 10 autoimmune diseases (autoimmune thyroid disease, myasthenia and/or thymoma, Sjoegren's syndrome, pernicious anaemia, idiopathic thrombocytopaenic purpura, Addison's disease, insulin-dependent diabetes, vitiligo, autoimmune haemolytic anaemia, systemic lupus erythematosus) for which a genetic predisposition (phenotype HLA B8 and/or DR3 or DR5) seems to be an important factor.
A significant increase in the frequency of HLA DR5 antigen was observed in patients with ARC mainly in purpura thrombocytopenic patients.
Genome-wide pathway analysis with the dysregulated genes after overexpression of either of the two miRs in MCF-7 breast cancer cell identified the "Cancer"- and "Cell signaling"-related pathway as the top pathway for miR-204 and miR-211, respectively.
In addition, a high association was observed between miR-204 and miR-211 expression in breast cancer tissue.
To shed light on their roles of miR-211 in breast cancer, the expression of miR-211 was examined by real-time RT-PCR in breast cancer and normal tissues.
MiR-211 is significantly downregulated in breast cancer.
MiR-211 re-expression suppressed cell growth, cell cycle, migration, and invasion in triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) cell line MDA-MB231.
The expression and the functional role of several miRNAs (miR-206, miR-31, miR-27a/b, miR-21, miR-92a, miR-205, miR-125a/b, miR-10b, miR-155, miR-146a/b, miR-335, miR-204, miR-211, miR-7, miR-22, miR-126, and miR-17) in breast cancer has been identified.
Quantitative RT-PCR analysis confirmed that miR-135b, miR-192, miR-194 and miR-211 were significantly up-regulated in radiation-induced mammary cancer compared with spontaneous cancer and normal mammary tissue.
The HBD/LD ratio in the measles patients two to three days after the onset of rash was significantly lower than that in control subjects (P less than 0.001).
UC treatment obviously reduced the expression levels of IL-2, IFN-Gamma, NF-KBp65, ICAM-1 and VEGF and increased inhibitory kappa B alpha (IKB-Alfa) expression in the grafts, where no obvious inflammatory cell infiltration or corneal neovascularization was found.
In contrast, none of other patients with MFM had necklace CBs except for one patient with reducing body myopathy.
Among the serums assessed, MMA levels showed a positive correlation to TNSr and KNPQ in the IPD patients with peripheral neuropathy (TNSr r = 0.882, p &lt; 0.001, KNPQ r = 0.710, p = 0.004), while Vitamin B12 and homocysteine showed no statistically significant correlation.
The serum MMA positively correlated with the severity of neuropathic pain and this can be used as a useful marker in assessment of peripheral neuropathy in Parkinson's disease.
Functional vitamin B12 deficiency, defined by elevated levels of the B12-dependent metabolites, methylmalonic acid (MMA), and/or homocysteine, despite normal B12 values, may cause neuropathy and is associated with disorders linked to increased oxidative stress.
CDC6 and GDF-9 expressions in 108 gallbladder adenocarcinomas, 15 gallbladder polyps, 35 chronic cholecystitis tissues, and 46 peritumoral tissues were detected using immunohistochemistry (IHC).
We demonstrated that positive CDC6 and GDF-9 expressions were significantly higher in adenocarcinomas than that in peritumoral tissues, polyps, and chronic cholecystitis (p &lt; 0.01).
Previously, we identified MFAP4 as a serum biomarker candidate for hepatic fibrosis and cirrhosis in hepatitis C patients.
The aim of the present study was to elucidate the potential of MFAP4 as biomarker for hepatic fibrosis with a focus on the differentiation of no to moderate (F0-F2) and severe fibrosis stages and cirrhosis (F3 and F4, Desmet-Scheuer scoring system).
Linear and logistic multivariate regression analyses were performed and nonparametric receiver operating characteristic-curves for cirrhosis were used to estimate cut-off points for pMFAP4.
Microfibrillar-associated protein 4 (MFAP4) is a systemic biomarker that is significantly elevated in samples from patients suffering from hepatic cirrhosis.
Tropomyosin and MFAP-4 demonstrated high serum levels in patients with hepatic cirrhosis of different causes.
A quantitative analysis of MFAP-4 serum levels in a large number of patients showed MFAP-4 as novel candidate biomarker with high diagnostic accuracy for prediction of nondiseased liver versus cirrhosis [area under receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) = 0.97, P &lt; 0.0001] as well as stage 0 versus stage 4 fibrosis (AUC = 0.84, P &lt; 0.0001), and stages 0 to 3 versus stage 4 fibrosis (AUC = 0.76, P &lt; 0.0001).
Low CRF had PARs of 9.3% and 10.5% for cancer mortality in subjects who had overweight and obesity, respectively.
The population attributable risks (PARs) were 0.41, 0.40 and 0.38 for total, CVD and cancer mortality, accordingly.
Mean EARs for lung cancer were 17.5 cases per 10,000 persons per year (PY) and 10.1 PY.
Mean EARs for breast cancer were 8.2 PY and 2.8 PY.
In addition, through activation of G-protein-coupled protease activated receptors (PARs) TF induces cell signaling that is related to cancer, angiogenesis and inflammation.
PARs are implicated in a wide range of diseases, such as cancer and inflammation.
Thrombin-induced activation of protease-activated receptors (PARs) represents a link between inflammation and cancer.
Frozen tunica vaginalis specimens from patients with adult-onset primary hydrocele testis and control male nonhydrocele patients were subjected to Western blot analysis for the detection of AQP1 and AQP3 proteins.
AQP1 protein expression in the tunica vaginalis was significantly higher in patients with adult-onset hydrocele testis than in the controls.
The densities of AQP1-expressing capillaries and lymphatic vessels were similar between the tunica vaginalis of the controls and those of hydrocele patients.
In conclusion, overexpression of the AQP1 protein in individual capillary endothelial cells of the tunica vaginalis may contribute to the development of adult-onset primary noncommunicating hydrocele testis as another aquaporin-related disease.
There are very few reports in the published literature of abdominal aortic aneurysm in patient with situs inversus totalis, all of whom underwent open aneurysm repair.
The authors describe a case of successfully repaired abdominal aortic aneurysm with a false aneurysm of the right external iliac artery in situs inversus totalis.
The surgical management of patients with abdominal aortic aneurysm in situs inversus totalis is discussed.
Collectively, the MLN CD11b- CD103+ PD-L1High DC subset probably takes up luminal antigens in the intestine, migrates to MLNs, and highly induces regulatory T cells through TGF-Beta activation.
Furthermore, Ye were found exclusively associated with CD103(+) DCs in the MLNs from wild-type mice, but not from CCR7(-/-) mice, demonstrating a CCR7 dependent transport of Ye by CD103(+) DCs from LP to the MLNs.
Although extensive studies have demonstrated the importance of the mesenteric lymph nodes (MLNs) and intestinal CD103(+) dendritic cells (DCs) in driving small intestinal tolerance to protein antigen, the structural and immunological basis of colonic tolerance remain poorly understood.
Despite tolerance development, CD103(+)CD11b(+) DCs, which are the major migratory DC population in the MLNs, and the tolerance-related retinoic acid-generating enzyme RALDH2 were virtually absent from the ILNs.
Here, we demonstrate that GVHD markedly enhances alloantigen presentation within the mesenteric lymph nodes (mLNs), mediated by donor CD103(+)CD11b(-) dendritic cells (DCs) that migrate from the colon under the influence of CCR7.
CD103(+) dendritic cells (DCs) continuously migrate from the intestine to the mesenteric lymph nodes (MLNs) and maintain tolerance by driving the development of regulatory T cells (Treg) in the gut.
Treatment with PBS followed by 1 single dose of VSL#3, 18 h before killing, was associated with a 2-fold increase in CD103(+)CD11c(+) dendritic cells in MLNs and PPs.
Reduced numbers of Th17 cells, suppressed interleukin (IL)-6 production by intestinal explants, and increased Tregs and CD103-positive regulatory dendritic cells in mesenteric lymph nodes (MLNs) were observed.
Thus, oral administration of C. kefyr ameliorated EAE by altering the microflora, accompanied by increased Tregs and CD103-positive regulatory dendritic cells in MLNs and decreased Th17 cells in the intestinal lamina propria.
The proportion of CD103 DCs in PPs and MLNs and IL-10-expressing CD4 T cells of PPs and the LP increased after indomethacin treatment.
The PP-null mice showed greater indomethacin-induced enteropathy, fewer CD103 DCs in their MLNs, and lower proportion of IL-10-expressing CD4 T cells of their LP than WT mice, regardless of commensal bacteria.
Naive splenic CD4 T cells co-cultured with CD103 DCs isolated from the MLNs of indomethacin-injected WT mice produced a higher amount of IL-10 compared with those co-cultured with CD103 DCs.
In rickets, on the other hand, no PTH/PTHrP receptor gene expression was observed in the growth plate from day 8 of a vitamin D-deficient diet.
These results suggest that alterations in the PTH/PTHrP receptor gene expression are associated with rickets but not with TD.
The reduction in the PTH/PTHrP receptor gene expression in rickets may be due to the high plasma levels of PTH.
What is more important is that the depressed-expression of Cav1.3 paralleled with enhanced-expression of Snapin was documented in atrial samples from atrial fibrillation (AF) patients.
Furthermore, inactivation of Cav1.3 channels promotes also atrial fibrillation and flutter in knockout mice suggesting that these channels can play a role in stabilizing atrial rhythm.
The significance of the tissue-specific expression of the channel is underpinned by our previous demonstration of atrial fibrillation in a Cav1.3 null mutant mouse model.
MRS studies (MRI 1.5 T unit) were performed in 49 patients with schizophrenia (30 with auditory hallucinations and 19 without auditory hallucinations) and 37 controls.
As a first step towards understanding the role of OPN in retinal degeneration (RD), we examined changes in OPN expression in a mouse model of RD induced by exposure to a blue light-emitting diode (LED).
Similarly, those who had retinal disease had higher osteopontin concentrations than those without (16.8+/-2 vs. 12.4+/-3 mg/L; p=0.005).
We investigated the expression of S100A4 and correlated it with clinical disease activity as well as with the levels of osteopontin (OPN), soluble syndecan-1, and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) in proliferative diabetic retinopathy (PDR).
Recent studies show overexpressed ENAH in several cancer types, and ENAH correlates with tumor invasiveness.
This study aimed to investigate the expression and function of ENAH in primary gastric adenocarcinoma, and its prognostic significance.
We found significantly increased mRNA (P = 0.0283) and protein (P = 0.0301) expression of ENAH in gastric cancer tissues.
