Jacobsen syndrome (JBS) is a contiguous gene deletion syndrome involving terminal chromosome 11q.
We investigated a boy with features of JBS using classic cytogenetic methods, FISH and high-resolution array CGH.
The patient had a hemizygous deletion in the FLI1 gene region without apparent thrombocytopenia, and he developed diabetes mellitus type I, which has not previously been described in the spectrum of disorders associated with JBS.
The relationship of some of the genes within the context of the phenotype caused by a partial deletion of 11q has provided insights concerning the developmental anomalies presented in this patient with atypical features of JBS.
All local patients were clustered "high-risk" for future CV events based on the Framingham score (mean 21.8%, 95% CI 20.0-23.6), JBS-2 (16.3%, 14.7-17.9) and ASSIGN (25.2%, 22.7-27.7).
Loss-of-function mutations in the UBR1 gene cause Johanson-Blizzard syndrome, which involves pancreatic exocrine insufficiency.
No previous studies have examined an association of UBR1 variants with pancreatitis, in part due to the large size of the gene.
This study aimed to clarify whether UBR1 variants are associated with chronic pancreatitis (CP) by the application of targeted next generation sequencing.
Jacobsen syndrome (JBS) is a contiguous gene deletion syndrome involving 11q terminal deletion.
Interstitial deletions at distal 11q are rare and their contributions to the clinical phenotype of JBS are unknown.
Our finds support the notion that more than one critical region at 11q23.3-qter are responsible for the variable clinical presentation of JBS, thus JBS is a true contiguous gene deletion syndrome where multiple loci contributed to the clinical characteristics of JBS.
Jacobsen syndrome (JBS) is an uncommon contiguous gene syndrome.
The typical clinical features in JBS include intellectual disability, growth retardation, craniofacial dysmorphism as well as craniosynostosis, congenital heart disease, and platelet abnormalities.
We report a novel deletion in JBS that increases the knowledge of the variability in the mutation sites in this region and expands the spectrum of molecular and clinical defects in this syndrome.
Johanson-Blizzard syndrome (JBS) is considered as an infrequent, but clinically easily recognizable autosomal recessive entity by the pathognomonic combination of congenital exocrine pancreatic insufficiency and hypoplastic alae nasi, in addition to other distinctive findings such as scalp defects, hypothyroidism, and rectourogenital malformations.
There are few reports of patients with JBS in association with facial clefting, referring all to types 2 to 6 of Tessier's classification that can be characterized properly as oblique facial clefts (OFCs).
We describe the clinical aspects in four patients with JBS and extensive OFCs.
In all of them, the diagnosis of JBS was confirmed by the demonstration of homozygous or compound-heterozygous mutations in the UBR1 gene.
Additionally, we review three previously reported cases of JBS with OFCs.
Taking into account a number of approximately 100 individuals affected by JBS that have been published in the literature we estimate that the frequency of OFCs in JBS is between 5% and 10%.
This report emphasizes that extensive OFCs may be the severe end of the spectrum of facial malformations occurring in JBS.
Jacobsen syndrome (JBS) is a rare congenital disorder caused by a terminal deletion of the long arm of chromosome 11.
PX-RICS is located in the chromosomal region commonly deleted in JBS patients with autistic-like behaviour.
Our findings demonstrate a critical role of PX-RICS in cognition and suggest a causal link between PX-RICS deletion and ASD-like behaviour in JBS patients.
Johanson-Blizzard Syndrome (JBS) (MIM #243800) is a rare autosomal recessive genetic disorder characterized by exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, abnormal facial appearance and varying degrees of mental retardation.
Here, we report a 3 year-old mentally normal JBS girl.
With these findings, JBS diagnosis was established clinically.
Joubert syndrome (JBS) is a rare neurodevelopmental disorder belonging to the group of ciliary diseases.
JBS is genetically heterogeneous, with &gt;20 causative genes identified to date.
A molecular diagnosis of JBS is essential for prediction of disease progression and genetic counseling.
We developed a targeted next-generation sequencing (NGS) approach for parallel sequencing of 22 known JBS genes plus 599 additional ciliary genes.
This method was used to genotype a cohort of 51 well-phenotyped Northern European JBS cases (in some of the cases, Sanger sequencing of individual JBS genes had been performed previously).
Altogether, 21 of the 51 cases (41%) harbored biallelic pathogenic mutations in known JBS genes, including 14 mutations not previously described.
Our study represents a population-based cohort of JBS patients not enriched for consanguinity, providing insight into the relative importance of the different JBS genes in a Northern European population.
Furthermore, we report a case with heterozygous mutations in CC2D2A and B9D1, a gene associated with the more severe Meckel-Gruber syndrome that was recently published as a potential new JBS gene, and discuss the significance of this finding.
ZIC2 and OVOL1 may function in nasopharyngeal carcinoma through targeting significantly up-regulated genes (such as PTGS2, FN1, CXCL9 and CXCL10) in the Transcription factor-differentially expressed gene regulatory network (e.g., ZIC2-&gt;PTGS2 and OVOL1-&gt;CXCL10).
PTGS2, FN1, CXCL9, CXCL10, ZIC2 and OVOL1 might play roles in nasopharyngeal carcinoma.
Literature data indicate that hyperprolactinemia (HPRL) is one of the important factors in the pathogenesis and course of autoimmune diseases such as systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, systemic sclerosis and Sjogren's syndrome.
Furthermore in the last 2 decades multi-organ and organ specific autoimmune diseases like systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), rheumatoid arthritis (RA), Sjogren's syndrome (SS), Hashimoto's thyroiditis (HT), multiple sclerosis (MS), psoriasis, hepatitis C patients, Behcet's disease, peripartum cardiomyopathy (PPCM) and active celiac disease were discussed to be associated with HPRL.
Hyperprolactinemia (HPRL) is observed in multi-organ and organ specific autoimmune diseases like systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) rheumatoid arthritis (RA), Sjogren's syndrome (SS), Hashimoto's thyroiditis (HT) and multiple sclerosis (MS).
We describe the role of PRL in the pathogenesis of rheumatic diseases, particularly connective tissue diseases, including systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), rheumatoid arthritis (RA), primary Sjoegren's syndrome, systemic sclerosis, polymyalgia rheumatica, and seronegative arthritis.
Moreover, we show that the reduction of eosinophilia and the recruitment of inflammatory monocytes to the lungs required early triggering of TLR9, IFN-Gamma and CCR2 by immunotherapy components.
Subjects treated with TLR9 agonists were at a higher risk of anemia (risk ratio [RR] 1.04, 95% confidence interval [CI]: 1.02-1.06), neutropenia (RR 1.16, 95% CI: 1.11-1.21), leukopenia (RR 1.16, 95% CI: 1.11-1.22), lymphopenia (RR 1.17, 95% CI: 1.10-1.25), thrombocytopenia (RR 1.20, 95% CI: 1.14-1.27), flu-like symptoms (RR 10.59, 95% CI: 3.66-30.66), diarrhea (RR 1.40, 95% CI: 1.18-1.67) and headache (RR 1.61, 95% CI: 1.26-2.06).
Both the TLR7 and TLR9 agonists dose dependently reduced airway eosinophilia, while the TLR3 agonist only reduced airway eosinophilia at a dose of 1.0 mg/kg.
&lt;p&gt;Lichen planopilaris (LPP) is a variant of lichen planus that affects the scalp causing scarring hair loss.
This family of diseases contains 2 subgroups, largely based on clinical features: keratosis pilaris atrophicans (KPA; including keratosis pilaris atrophicans faciei/ulerythema ophryogenes, atrophoderma vermiculata, and keratosis follicularis spinulosa decalvans); and the lichen planopilaris (LPP) subgroup (including LPP, frontal fibrosing alopecia, Graham-Little-Piccardi-Lassueur Syndrome and fibrosing alopecia in a pattern distribution).
An interface dermatitis with lichenoid inflammation is characteristic of the LPP group of disorders, but the literature provides scant information about the histopathology of the KPA group.
Recently, there have been25 cases reported in the literature of lichen planuspigmentosus (LPPi) that preceded the developmentof frontal fibrosing alopecia (FFA), which is a variantof lichen planopilaris (LPP).
Lower levels of acylCer and LPP accompany skin diseases, such as atopic dermatitis, lamellar ichthyosis, and psoriasis.
A number of associations such as hepatitis C virus infection, frontal fibrosing alopecia, acrokeratosis of Bazex and nephrotic syndrome have been reported with LPP.
Lichen planopilaris (LPP) is a follicular variant of lichen planus.
However, genes like HSP90, PAK2, CD247 and others included in the first 1% of the prioritized list need to be further explored in preeclampsia pathogenesis through experimental approaches.
We report a case of acute pancreatitis with diabetic ketoacidosis associated with increased serum myoglobin concentration, acute renal failure, and disseminated intravascular coagulation.
We examined the relationship among acute pancreatitis, diabetic ketoacidosis, and hypermyoglobinemia in the literature.
The frequency of nontraumatic rhabdomyolysis in diabetic ketoacidosis was investigated by serial measurements of the serum levels of myoglobin and the serum activity of creatine kinase isoenzyme MM in 12 consecutively admitted ketoacidotic patients.
In conclusion, our findings suggest that nontraumatic rhabdomyolysis with hypermyoglobinaemia and elevated serum activity of creatine kinase isoenzyme MM may be a hitherto unrecognized common feature of diabetic ketoacidosis.
Bioinformatics and luciferase reporter assays demonstrated that miR-495 targets the 3'-untranslated region of high-mobility group nucleosome-binding domain 5 (HMGN5), a potential oncogene in various types of cancers.
High-mobility group nucleosome-binding domain 5 (HMGN5), a well-known oncogene in gliomas, was identified as a functional target of miR-409-3p using bioinformatics, dual-luciferase reporter assay, real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction, and Western blot analysis.
Restoration of HMGN5 expression significantly reversed the inhibitory effects of miR-409-3p overexpression on glioma cell invasion and proliferation.
Taken together, our results suggest that miR-409-3p inhibits glioma cell invasion and proliferation by targeting HMGN5, representing a potential therapeutic target for glioma.
It was first discovered in mouse, and recent studies found that the expressions of HMGN5 in many human cancers were also highly regulated, such as prostate, bladder, breast, and lung and clear cell renal cell carcinoma.
Importantly, deficiency of HMGN5 has been shown to be linked to cancer cell growth, cell cycle regulation, migration, invasion, and clinical outcomes, and it represents a promising therapeutic target for many malignant tumors.
In the present review, we provide an overview of the current knowledge concerning the role of HMGN5 in cancer development and progression.
Nucleosome-binding protein 1 (NSBP1) has been suggested as an oncogene in various types of human cancers.
We found that NSBP1 was highly expressed in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells, and knockdown of NSBP1 by NSBP1 small interfering RNA (siRNA) significantly suppressed NSCLC cell proliferation and invasion.
Overexpression of miR-326 significantly inhibited NSCLC cell proliferation and invasion, which mimicked the effect of NSBP1 siRNA.
Furthermore, suppression of NSBP1 by NSBP1 siRNA or miR-326 overexpression remarkably repressed the expression of cyclin B1 and matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP9), which are associated with cancer cell proliferation and invasion.
In addition, an inverse correlation between miR-326 and NSBP1 expression levels was found in NSCLC clinical specimens.
Our study demonstrated a direct target relationship between NSBP1 and miR-326 through which miR-326 inhibited cell proliferation and invasion of NSCLC cells.
Thus, miR-326-NSBP1 is a promising candidate target for developing novel anticancer therapeutics for NSCLC.
Correlation analysis also showed that HMGN5 expression levels were significantly inversely correlated with the miR-340 expression in prostate cancer tissues.
In addition, overexpression of HMGN5 significantly reversed the inhibitory effect of miR-340 on prostate cancer cell proliferation and invasion.
Moreover, the decreased miR-340 expression may contribute to the development and progression of prostate cancer through a mechanism that involves HMGN5.
Thus, miR340 and its target gene HMGN5 can serve as potentially useful therapeutic candidates for prostate cancer treatment.
The high-mobility group nucleosome-binding protein-5 (HMGN5) is frequently overexpressed in various malignant cancers.
However, the potential correlation between HMGN5 and prognosis in patients with meningiomas remains unknown.
In the present study, we explored the expression of HMGN5 in meningiomas with immunohistochemistry and correlated the results to the patient outcome.
We demonstrate that there is a positive association between HMGN5 expression and meningioma histological grade.
Statistical analysis reveals that lower HMGN5 expression predict lower meningioma recurrence.
Our results further revealed that HMGN5 inhibition decreased P-glycoprotein (MDR-1) expression without affecting multidrug resistance associated proteins 1 (MRP-1) expression to increase chemosensitivity to temozolomide (TMZ) of meningioma cells.
Collectively, this study indicates that HMGN5 is a novel target for developing effective therapeutic strategies for malignant meningiomas.
Luciferase reporter assay showed that miR-186 targets NSBP1 3'-untranslated region (UTR) directly and suppresses NSBP1 (HMGN5) expression in human bladder cancer cells.
Our data first time identified miR-186 as the upstream regulator of NSBP1 and also suggest miR-186-suppressed NSBP1 as a novel therapeutic approach for bladder cancer.
In this study, we show that TK1 is upregulated and localizes on the plasma membrane of Burkitt's lymphoma, acute promyelocytic leukemia, T cell leukemia, and acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL).
TK1 has been reported as a reliable prognostic factor in solid tumors and chronic lymphocytic leukemia, but has not yet been tested in large populations of patients with non-Hodgkin lymphoma.
In this study, the prognostic significance of TK1 levels was assessed in 170 prospectively enrolled patients with previously untreated follicular lymphoma (FL).
The TK1 level at the time of treatment initiation was shown to correlate with the clinical stage, Follicular Lymphoma International Prognostic Index (FLIPI) score, Beta(2)-microglobulin level, lactate dehydrogenase level and B symptoms.
We show that high serum TK1 levels predict poorer overall survival and correlate with unmutated immunoglobulin variable region genes, CD38 and ZAP-70 expression, and subsequent risk of developing large B-cell lymphoma (Richter syndrome).
In the present study, we revealed that the Hippo transducer, the transcriptional coactivator with PDZ-binding motif (TAZ), acts as a downstream mediator of PODXL in colon cancer.
Moreover, PODXL plays a critical role in cancer stemness, invasiveness, and sensitivity to chemotherapies in colon cancer HCT15 cells.
Notably, expression of PODXL showed a positive correlation with stem-like and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) core signatures, and was associated with poor survival outcomes in patients with colon cancer.
These findings provide novel insights into the molecular mechanism of PODXL-mediated tumorigenesis in colon cancer.
Podocalyxin (PODXL), which belongs to the CD34 family and regulates cell morphology, has been linked to EMT in lung cancer, and PODXL overexpression is associated with poor prognosis in several different classes of cancers.
The aim of this study was to clarify the role of PODXL overexpression in EMT in lung cancer, and to determine the prognostic value of PODXL overexpression in tumors from lung cancer patients.
The morphology, EMT marker expression, and migration and invasion abilities of engineered A549 PODXL-knockdown (KD) or PODXL-overexpression (OE) lung adenocarcinoma cells were examined.
PODXL expression levels were assessed by immunohistochemistry in 114 human clinical lung adenocarcinoma specimens and correlated with clinical outcomes.
A highly selective inhibitor of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-Akt signaling attenuated EMT of PODXL-OE cells, while a transforming growth factor inhibitor did not, suggesting that PODXL induces EMT of lung adenocarcinoma cells via the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase pathway.
In lung adenocarcinoma clinical specimens, PODXL expression was detected in minimally invasive and invasive adenocarcinoma, but not in non-invasive adenocarcinoma.
PODXL overexpression induces EMT in lung adenocarcinoma and contributes to tumor progression.
The aim of this study was to investigate the impact of PODXL expression on survival in esophageal and gastric adenocarcinoma.
In gastric adenocarcinoma, patients with PODXL negative tumors had a superior TTR and a trend towards an improved OS.
In esophageal and gastric adenocarcinoma combined, the prognostic significance of PODXL expression on TTR was confirmed in unadjusted Cox regression analysis (HR = 5.36, 95 % CI 1.68-17.06, p = 0.005) and remained significant in the adjusted model (HR = 3.39, 95 % CI 1.01-11.35, p = 0.048).
In esophageal and gastric adenocarcinoma, PODXL expression is an independent prognostic biomarker for reduced time to recurrence and poor overall survival.
Here, we report that high PODXL expression was an independent predictor of worse overall survival of pancreatic cancer patients, and that PODXL promoted pancreatic cancer cell motility and invasion by physically binding to the cytoskeletal protein gelsolin.
Furthermore, transfection of a PODXL-rescue construct into pancreatic cancer cells in which both PODXL and gelsolin were suppressed failed to increase the formation of the protrusions.
Podocalyxin-like 1 (PODXL) is an anti-adhesive transmembrane protein that has been demonstrated to be an independent factor of poor prognosis in colorectal cancer (CRC).
In addition, we identified a possible target of miR-5100, podocalyxin-like 1 (PODXL), and demonstrated miR-5100 directly binds to the 3' untranslated region of PODXL and post-transcriptionally regulates its expression in pancreatic cancer cells.
We also clarified the close relationship between expression of PODXL in human pancreatic cancer specimens and liver metastasis (P=0.0003), and determined that post-operative survival was longer in the low-PODXL expression group than in the high-PODXL expression group (P&lt;0.05).
These results indicate that miR-5100 and PODXL have considerable therapeutic potential for anti-metastatic therapy and could be potential indicators for cancer metastases in patients with pancreatic cancer.
Previously we demonstrated that miR-199b was significantly downregulated in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and targets podocalyxin and discoidin domain receptor 1.
Therefore, we set out to determine if podocalyxin plays a functional role in breast tumor progression.
Forced overexpression of podocalyxin caused cohesive clusters of epithelial MCF-7 breast tumor cells to bud off from the primary tumor and collectively invade the stroma of the mouse mammary gland in vivo.
The DEGs MAPT, DSTN, SPTBN1, ARHGEF2 and SKA1 are suggested to be candidate biomarkers for childhood obesity.
All received support and advice by community Diabetes Specialist Nurses (DSNs) and Dieticians covering Central and Eastern Cheshire, UK.
In 2009, the PCT confirmed 3 years funding for a Paediatric Diabetes specialist nurse (PDSN) for schools.
The aim of this study was to explore the interaction between diabetes specialist nurses (DSNs) and patients with type 2 diabetes (T2D) during group sessions about self-management.
In 8 Italian municipalities, 2,512 men and women without both diabetes and CI-DSN at baseline are examined.
The majority (72%) of PHCCs had diabetes-responsible general practitioners (GPs) and almost all (97%) had diabetes specialist nurses (DSNs) with some degree of postgraduate education in diabetes.
The PHCCs reported that they used regional/local diabetes guidelines (93%), were engaged in call-recall diabetic reviews by GP(s) (66%) and DSN(s) (89%), checked that patients had participated in the reviews by GP(s) (69%) and DSN(s) (78%), arranged group education programmes (23%) and reported data to a National Diabetes Register (82%).
The presence of diabetes-responsible GP(s) and DSN(s) who use guidelines may contribute to good and equal quality of care.
To review the working practices of UK diabetes specialist nurses (DSNs), specific clinical roles, and to examine changes since 2000.
Postal questionnaires were sent to lead DSNs from all identifiable UK diabetes centres (n = 361).
Quantitative and qualitative data were collected on the specific clinical roles, employment, and continual professional development of hospital and community DSNs, Nurse Consultants and Diabetes Healthcare Assistants.
22% of DSNs have a formal role in diabetes research compared with 48% in 2000.
Patients were recruited from 40 general practices and randomised (40:40:20 ratio) to receive routine care alone or, in addition, motivational telephone support from a peer supporter or a diabetes specialist nurse (9 peers and 12 DSNs) for a period of up to 6 months.
We exposed the human NSCLC cell lines Calu-1, CL3, H1299, CH27, H23, and H1355 to B[a]P and assessed cell cycle progression using flow cytometry.
Moreover, DOX-loaded micelles could slowly and efficiency decrease cell viability of non-small-cell lung carcinoma CL3 cells.
Comet assay was used to evaluate the DNA damage induced by a relatively low dose of COF (100 g/ml) in human lung adenocarcinoma CL-3 cells.
Pb(II) increased the phosphorylated ERK1/2 and phosphorylated AKT but not the phosphorylated ERK5, phosphorylated p38 and JNK activity in human non-small cell lung adenocarcinoma CL3 cells.
The results from reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction showed that the hOGG1 mRNA expression was induced by hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) and COF in human lung adenocarcinoma CL-3 cells.
To reveal the relationship between the high mortality rate of lung cancer in Chinese women and exposure to cooking oil fumes (COF), DNA adduct formation, induced by COF collected from frying fish under domestic conditions, was assessed in human lung adenocarcinoma CL-3 cell lines using the (32)P-postlabeling assay.
In this study we have explored the involvement of oxidative stress in Cr(VI)-induced JNK, p38 and ERK signaling pathways and their effects on Cr(VI) cytotoxicity in human non-small cell lung carcinoma CL3 cells.
The expression pattern of mucin genes was studied in 7 lung adenocarcinoma cell lines (CL1, CL2, CL3, NCL2, PC9, PC13, PC14) and 12 lung adenocarcinoma tissues.
Osteogenesis imperfecta model, oim(-/-) , mice have a defect in the collagen, which leads to brittle bone; PHOSPHO1 mutants, Phospho1(-/-) , have ductile bone resulting from altered mineralization.
Because two mammalian isoforms of iPLA2 (iPLA2beta and iPLA2gamma) have been cloned and characterized, the aim of this study was to identify the specific isoform(s) in macrophages that regulates the expression of iNOS in response to virus infection.
cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) is one downstream target of iPLA2 that is required for the transcriptional activation of iNOS in response to virus infection, and consistent with the effects of BEL enantiomers on iNOS expression, (S)-BEL more effectively inhibits EMCV-induced CREB phosphorylation than (R)-BEL in macrophages.
Using macrophages isolated from iPLA2beta-null mice, virus infection fails to stimulate iNOS mRNA accumulation and protein expression, thus providing genetic evidence that iPLA2beta is required for EMCV-induced iNOS expression.
Specific attention will be placed on the ability of virus infection to activate multiple signaling cascades (such as PKR, MAPK, iPLA2, NF-kappaB) and how these pathways are integrated in the regulation of individual target gene expression.
In comparison with PRCC1, PRCC2 cases showed upregulated expression of Alfa5-integrin (ITGA5) whereas the expression of Alfa6- (ITGA6) and Beta8-integrins (ITGB8) was downregulated.
HFD-fed mice lacking Cnot7 and Tob express elevated levels of Ucp1 mRNA in iWAT and are resistant to diet-induced obesity.
Thus, the Cnot7-Tob-BRF1 axis inhibits Ucp1 expression and contributes to obesity.
Since abnormal and unbalanced JAK/STAT activation is associated with immune disorders and cancer, hCAF1 could play a major role in innate immunity and oncogenesis, contributing to tumour escape.
Our previous study (Nakamura et al., 2004) showed that deletion of the Cnot7 gene in mice caused almost no abnormal phenotypes except for male infertility, due to oligo-astheno-teratozoospermia.
Mutations in the gene encoding the neural cell adhesion molecule L1CAM cause several neurological disorders collectively referred to as L1 syndrome.
A 59-year-old woman receiving methotrexate and tacrolimus for rheumatoid arthritis (RA) was referred to our hospital following bilateral ground-glass opacity observed in her chest X-ray and elevated serum KL-6.
During treatment of rheumatoid arthritis (RA)-associated interstitial lung disease (ILD) with prednisolone, chest image findings improved in association with decreased KL-6 levels.
The results showed that treatment with the MUC1-MBP/BCG anti-tumor vaccine did not cause any organ toxicity, except for arthritis or local nodules induced by BCG in several rats.
To investigate leptin, adiponectin, soluble intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (sICAM-1), soluble vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (sVCAM-1) levels and their relationship with each other and metabolic parameters in women with polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS).
Non-insulin resistant PCOS had significantly higher adiponectin and sVCAM-1 levels.
Increases in IL-6 and TNF-Alfa and adhesion molecules (E-selectin, ICAM-1 and VCAM-1) were also observed, particularly in the PCOS IR group, providing evidence that inflammation and oxidative stress are related in PCOS patients.
Inflammation in PCOS induces leukocyte-endothelium interactions and a simultaneous increase in IL-6, TNF-Alfa, E-selectin, ICAM-1 and VCAM-1.
In conclusion, we disclosed a novel mechanism that JQ1 inhibits cell proliferation, induces cell senescence and apoptosis of chondrosarcoma cells through the regulation of the YAP/p21/c-Myc/Bcl-xL signaling axis.
BH-3 mimetics ABT-737 and ABT-263 are synthetic small-molecule inhibitors of anti-apoptotic proteins B-cell lymphoma-2 (Bcl2) and Bcl-xL, which play a critical role in survival of chondrosarcoma cells.
Here we show that the IHh signal pathway was activated in chondrosarcoma, and knocking down the expression of Gli1 attenuated the disturbed IHh signal pathway, which not only suppressed cell proliferation and promoted G2/M cell cycle arrest but also enhanced cell apoptosis by downregulating Bcl-2 and Bcl-xl expression.
As in conventional chondrosarcoma, antiapoptotic proteins (Bcl-2, and/or Bcl-xl) were highly expressed in all subtypes.
BPB induced upregulation of Bax, Bad and Bak, downregulation of Bcl-2, Bid and Bcl-XL and dysfunction of mitochondria in chondrosarcoma.
EGCG induced upregulation of Bax and Bak, downregulation of Bcl-2 and Bcl-XL, and dysfunction of mitochondria in chondrosarcoma.
FPTB induced up-regulation of Bax and Bak, down-regulation of Bcl-2 and Bcl-XL and dysfunction of mitochondria in chondrosarcoma.
This study aims to investigate the expression patterns of HIF-1Alfa in chondrosarcoma, and its association with clinicopathologic features, Bcl-xL expression, apoptosis index (AI), and overall survival of patients with chondrosarcoma.
In eight patients with chondrosarcoma, increased expression of HIF-1Alfa and Bcl-xL was detected in chondrosarcoma tissues compared with the paired adjacent normal tissues.
These findings suggest that increased HIF-1Alfa levels mediated up-regulation of Bcl-xL play a prominent role in evasion of apoptosis and tumor progression, and can be predictive for the prognosis in human chondrosarcoma.
Three-dimensional speckle tracking echocardiography (3D-STE) was used to evaluate the improvement of continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion on the left ventricular (LV) systolic function of patients with type 2 diabetes mellitu (T2DM).
To elucidate association of renal dysfunction (RD) with unfavorable outcomes of in-hospital and long-term (1 year) treatment stages of patients with ST-elevation (STE) myocardial infarction (MI) and concomitant diabetes mellitus (DM).
Multivariate regression analysis showed that GPLS and diabetes mellitus were independent predictors for complex NSTE-ACS.
No differences were observed between the two groups in baseline characteristics; except AS-STEMI group had more patients with diabetes and EA-STEMI group had more patients with family history of coronary artery disease.
To elucidate association of renal dysfunction (RD) with unfavorable outcomes of in-hospital and long-term (1 year) treatment stages of patients with ST-elevation (STE) myocardial infarction (M) and concomitant diabetes mellitus (DM).
Incidence of complicated diabetes (P &lt; 0.05), pre-PCI Killip &gt;= II (55.9% (19/34) vs. 26.8% (15/56), P &lt; 0.05) and multivessel disease (70.6% (24/34) vs. 35.7% (20/56), P &lt; 0.05) were significantly higher in group D than in group C. TIMI 3 and the opening time of IRA was similar between group A and group B and between group C and group D. The incidence of in-hospital MACE was significantly higher in group B than in group A (14.4% (13/90) vs. 3.0% (4/135), P &lt; 0.05) which was similar between group C and group D. Early (1 hour) but not late (24 hours) ST resolution post PCI is related to a favorable clinical outcome in STEMI patients.
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) and Western blotting were performed to evaluate SOX4 expression between OLP and OLP-OSCC tissues and among oral cancer cell lines and normal human oral keratinocytes (NHOKs).
LC-MS/MS analysis showed that 88 proteins including SOX4 were only identified in OLP-OSCC FFPE tissues when compared to OLP FFPE tissues.
IHC confirmed that SOX4 expression was significantly higher in OLP-OSCC than OLP and Western blot analysis indicated that SOX4 was over-expressed in UM1/UM2 cells when compared to NHOKs.
Our study indicated that SOX4 is significantly upregulated in OLP-OSCC versus OLP tissues.
These findings suggest that SOX4 might be actively involved in the progression of OLP to OSCC.
This study evaluated whether SOX4 affects oncogenic behavior and chemoradiotherapy response in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) cells, and documented the relationship between its expression and prognosis in oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC).
SOX4 expression in OSCC tissues was investigated by immunohistochemistry.
Immunostaining showed SOX4 protein was significantly increased in OSCC tissues compared with adjacent normal mucosa.
SOX4 expression was observed in 51.8 % of 85 OSCC tissues, and was significantly correlated with treatment failure (P = 0.032) and shorter overall survival (P = 0.036) in patients with OSCC.
This study was the first to investigate correlations between SOX4 expression levels and the clinicopathologic factors of oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC).
We analyzed SOX4 expression levels in 50 patients with OSCC using immunohistochemistry.
The expression level of SOX4 in primary foci of poorly differentiated OSCC was higher than that of well differentiated OSCC, which indicated that SOX4 expression is associated with the differentiation of OSCC.
These results indicate that undifferentiated OSCC cells expressing SOX4 are more likely to metastasize and neoadjuvant therapy including chemoradiation therapy may have some effect in metastatic prevention.
Cryptorchidism was significantly associated with development of MGCSCTs, SCTs, and SEMs, but not ICTs (p&lt;0.01).
Since nerve functions are affected by inflammatory response during the course of leprosy, changes in the production of NGF and its receptor (NGF R) may be directly associated with disability and sensory loss.
Skin biopsies were collected and submitted to immunohistochemistry using specific antibodies to IL-17, NGF and NGF R. Quantitative analysis of NGF, NGFR and IL-17 immunostaining showed a significant difference between the clinical forms, with higher expression of NGF and NGFR in lepromatous leprosy and IL-17 in tuberculoid leprosy.
The recovered CD271(+) BM-MSCs from post-therapy mice, when injected into healthy mice, caused active tuberculosis infection in the animal's lung.
Next, in human subjects, previously treated for pulmonary tuberculosis, the MTB-containing CD271(+) BM-MSCs exhibited high expression of hypoxia-inducible factor 1Alfa and low expression of CD146, a hypoxia down-regulated cell surface marker of human BM-MSCs.
The bone marrow niche of Mycobacterium tuberculosis within CD271(+) BM-MSCs stem cells is the proposed explanation for the localized cortical resorption that is observed in bone stress markers.
Therefore, the objective of this study was to correlate the immunoexpression patterns of NGF and NGF-R in the different clinical forms of leprosy, and to associate the findings with the in situ expression of TGF-Beta and clinical classification of the disease.
There was a significant positive correlation between NGF and NGF-R in the different clinical forms of leprosy.
Moreover, most viable M. tuberculosis was recovered from the bone marrow CD271(+)CD45(-)-enriched cell fraction, and only few viable bacteria could be isolated from the CD271(-)CD45(+) cell fraction.
We recently developed a systems biological approach to vaccine safety evaluation where identification of specific biomarkers in a rat pre-clinical study evaluated the safety of vaccines for pandemic H5N1 influenza including Irf7, Lgals9, Lgalsbp3, Cxcl11, Timp1, Tap2, Psmb9, Psme1, Tapbp, C2, Csf1, Mx2, Zbp1, Ifrd1, Trafd1, Cxcl9, Beta2m, Npc1, Ngfr and Ifi47.
MdmX overexpression contributes to the development of cancer by inhibiting tumor suppressor p53.
A switch in the alternative splicing of MdmX transcript, leading to the inclusion of exon 6, has been identified as the primary mechanism responsible for increased MdmX protein levels in human cancers, including melanoma.
Recent studies showed that interfering with cellular splicing machinery can result in MdmX downregulation in cancer cells.
We, therefore, hypothesized that enoxacin could, by modulating miRNAs targeting splicing machinery, activate p53 in melanoma cells overexpressing MdmX.
Not only in melanoma, but also in MCF7 breast carcinoma and A2780 ovarian carcinoma cells overexpressing MdmX.
Together, our results suggest that some clinically approved fluoroquinolones could potentially be repurposed as activators of p53 tumor suppressor in cancers overexpressing MdmX oncoprotein and that p53 activation might contribute to the previously reported activity of enoxacin towards human cancer cells.
These will be discussed as will recent findings of MDMX inhibitors: these are of special importance as it has been shown that cancers that become resistant to MDM2 inhibitors often amplify MDM4.
We speculate that E3 ubiquitin ligases MDM2 and MDM4 can be attractive therapeutic target for p53 and Notch signaling pathways in malignant melanoma by using small molecule inhibitors.
Our recent studies conducted in South America have shown that mycotoxin contamination of red chili peppers (RCPs) may be associated with an increased risk of gallbladder cancer (GBC).
Three proteins were uniquely altered in vaginal carcinoma (DDX48, erbB3-binding protein and biliverdin reductase) and five in cervical carcinoma (peroxiredoxin 2, annexin A2, sarcomeric tropomyosin kappa, human ribonuclease inhibitor and prolyl-4-hydrolase beta).
Mitochondrial (mt) DNA-associated NARP (neurogenic muscle weakness, ataxia, and retinitis pigmentosa) syndrome is due to mutation in the MT-ATP6 gene.
Pathogenic mutations in MT-ATP6 are associated with the Leigh syndrome, the syndrome of neuropathy, ataxia, and retinitis pigmentosa (NARP), as well as with non-classical phenotypes, while MT-ATP8 is less frequently mutated in patients with mitochondrial disease.
Analysis of these populations demonstrated an altered metabolic signature in cells harbouring decreased levels of mutant m.8993T&gt;G mtDNA, associated with neuropathy, ataxia, and retinitis pigmentosa (NARP).
Neurogenic muscle weakness, ataxia, and retinitis pigmentosa (NARP) is caused by m.8993T&gt;G/C mutations in the mitochondrial adenosine triphosphate synthase subunit 6 gene (MT-ATP6).
In addition, we successfully reduced human mutated mtDNA levels responsible for Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy (LHOND), and neurogenic muscle weakness, ataxia, and retinitis pigmentosa (NARP), in mammalian oocytes using mitochondria-targeted TALEN (mito-TALENs).
Based on our previous findings that ROS level was higher in human osteosarcoma cybrids--Neuropathy, Ataxia and Retinitis Pigmentosa (NARP) and was reduced by selenite treatment, this study was designed to elucidate the effects of selenite administration on oxidative and nitrosative damage to lipids, proteins and DNA.
We report a patient having classical clinical feature of neurologic muscle weakness, ataxia, and retinitis pigmentosa (NARP) and a novel mutation, m.8729 G&gt;A in mitochondria DNA.
His mother, who had previously been diagnosed with cerebral palsy, was concurrently diagnosed with neuropathy, ataxia, and retinitis pigmentosa (NARP) due to heteroplasmy of the same mutation.
In this issue, Gammage and colleagues successfully apply this improved technology on patients' cells with two types of genetic alterations responsible for neuropathy ataxia and retinitis pigmentosa (NARP) syndrome and Kearns Sayre syndrome and progressive external ophthalmoplegia (PEO).
There are several diseases that have a mitochondrial origin such as chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia (CPEO) and the Kearns- Sayre syndrome (KSS), myoclonic epilepsy with ragged-red fibers (MERRF), mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, lactic acidosis and strokelike episodes (MELAS), Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON), the syndrome of neurogenic muscle weakness, ataxia and retinitis pigmentosa (NARP), and Leigh's syndrome.
Neuroblastoma cells treated with free myb-as or nontargeted CCL-myb-as showed the same level of c-myb protein expression as control cells.
Immune cell activation, involving the time-dependent activation of macrophages and NK cells, contributes to the antitumor activity of targeted liposome-CpG-myb-as against neuroblastoma and could improve the effectiveness of antitumor targeted liposomes.
While YY1 is known to exert both positive and negative regulatory influences on nuclear-encoded mitochondrial proteins, as well as on neurodegeneration-related genes, in all cell lines we studied (including neuroblastoma) the effect of YY1 on GDAP1 expression is activatory.
Using the DBH-expressing human neuroblastoma SK-N-BE(2)C and DBH-negative HeLa cell lines as model systems, we report here that this CRE/YY1/AP1 area interacts with multiple nuclear proteins, including CRE-binding protein (CREB) and transcription factor YY1 in a cell-specific manner.
However, little is known about the expression of CD44v6 in Gastric Carcinoma (GC).
Multiple carcinomas including breast, ovarian, colon, lung and stomach cancer, overexpress the hyaluronic acid (HA) receptor, CD44.
Here, we show that the transcription of a long non-coding RNA (lncRNA), Gastric Adenocarcinoma Associated, Positive CD44 Regulator, Long Intergenic Non-Coding RNA (GAPLINC), is directly activated by HIF-1Alfa in gastric cancer (GC).
The expressions of 10 putative cell surface markers of CSCs, as well as aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) activity, were studied, and the tumorigenic properties of cells were evaluated by in vitro tumorsphere assays and in vivo xenografts by limiting dilution assays.Results: We found that a subpopulation of gastric carcinoma cells expressing EPCAM, CD133, CD166, CD44, and a high ALDH activity presented the properties to generate new heterogeneous tumorspheres in vitro and tumors in vivo CD44 and CD166 were coexpressed, representing 6.1% to 37.5% of the cells; ALDH activity was detected in 1.6% to 15.4% of the cells; and the ALDH+ cells represented a core within the CD44+/CD166+ subpopulation that contained the highest frequency of tumorigenic CSCs in vivo The ALDH+ cells possessed drug efflux properties and were more resistant to standard chemotherapy than the ALDH- cells, a process that was partially reversed by verapamil treatment.Conclusions: CD44 and ALDH are the most specific biomarkers to detect and isolate tumorigenic and chemoresistant gastric CSCs in noncardia gastric carcinomas independently of the histologic classification of the tumor.
Clinically, low CD10 expression was consistent with a specific set of ovarian cancer patient samples.
Furthermore, our data indicate that primary stage targeting of CD10-/ALDH- CSCs in specific ovarian cancer patients in future may facilitate targeting of recurrent disease, before it ever develops.
All cases were negative for CD10 and WT-1 ruling out endometrial stromal tumor and were negative for HMB-45 and melan-A ruling out perivascular epithelioid cell tumor (both endometrial stromal tumor and perivascular epithelioid cell tumor have prominent vessels but have different histomorphology).
Immunohistochemistry indicated a phenotypic transition from a uterine leiomyosarcoma to a vaginal epithelioid lesion; marker expression changed from the uterine tumor actin+/desmin+/caldesmon+/CD10- phenotype, through the tumor emboli, to an actin-/desmin-/caldesmon-/CD10+ phenotype in the vaginal lesion.
Immunohistochemistry for IFITM1 and CD10 was performed in 20 cases of smooth muscle neoplasms (10 cases leiomyoma, 10 cases leiomyosarcoma), 14 cases of endometrial stromal sarcoma (ESS) (12 cases of low grade and 2 cases of high grade) and 12 cases of carcinosarcoma.
While both IFITM1 (83%) and CD10 (91%) had high sensitivity in differentiating low-grade ESSs from smooth muscle neoplasms, IFITM1 (70%) had higher specificity compared with CD10 (45%).
In this study IFITM1 appears to be a more specific marker of endometrial stromal differentiation compared with CD10 in differentiating low-grade ESSs from smooth muscle neoplasms.
To further evaluate the nature of the HLA association with alopecia areata (AA), we investigated the HLA-DRB1 locus in 161 AA patients and 165 matched controls from Belgium and Germany.
In the present study, we found that miR-19a expression was significantly upregulated in metastatic clear cell renal carcinoma than that in adjacent and primary carcinoma tissues using qPCR and in situ hybridization experiments.
Thus, we provide evidence demonstrating that downregulation of miR-19a may be therapeutically beneficial for metastatic renal carcinoma.
Taqman probe stem-loop real-time PCR was used to accurately measure the levels of miR-19a in bladder cancer cell lines, 100 pairs of bladder cancer tissues and the adjacent non-neoplastic tissues and also the plasma collected from bladder cancer patients and normal controls.
miR-19a mimics and inhibitors were transfected into bladder cancer cells to investigate its role on regulating cell proliferation which was measured by CCK-8 and colony formation assay.
miR-19a was significantly up-regulated in bladder cancer tissues and high-level of miR-19a was correlative with more aggressive phenotypes of bladder cancer.
Meanwhile, gain or loss of function of miR-19a demonstrated that miR-19a can promote cell growth of bladder cancer cells and the further mechanism studies indicated that its oncogenic role was dependent on targeting PTEN.
Furthermore, investigation of miR-19a expression in the plasma of bladder cancer patients showed that miR-19a was also increased in plasma of bladder cancer patients which strongly supported miR-19a could be developed as potential diagnostic marker of bladder cancer.
Our data indicated that miR-19a might act as an oncogenic microRNA in bladder cancer and was significantly up-regulated in bladder cancer carcinogenesis.
The oncogenic role of miR19a in bladder cancer was dependent on targeting PTEN.
The synergy effect between miRNA-19a and arsenic trioxide that advocates targeting the mir-19a may represent a potential approach to enhance the efficacy and safety of ATO to treat bladder cancer by a decrease in dose.
There was significant decreases in serum albumin and haptoglobin and increases in alpha-1 globulin, ceruloplasmin and alpha-1 globulin, there were no significant differences between schistosomiasis patients and the controls in terms of changes in any laboratory test as a result of the treatment, thus suggesting that patients with active schistosomiasis do not incur a higher risk of hepatic dysfunction while using oral contraception.
Aqueous flare values and the vitreous levels of VEGF, IL-6, MCP-1, sICAM-1, and sVEGFR-2 were compared between previously untreated patients with BRVO and patients with macular hole (MH).
We investigated the relations between the aqueous flare value and vitreous levels of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), soluble intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (sICAM-1), and interleukin-6 (IL-6) in patients with CRVO and macular edema or patients with idiopathic macular hole (MH).
Vitreous fluid levels of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), soluble VEGF receptor 2 (sVEGFR-2), soluble intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (sICAM-1), interleukin 6 (IL-6), monocyte chemotactic protein 1 (MCP-1), and pentraxin 3 (PTX3) were significantly higher in CRVO patients than in macular hole patients.
In 39 patients with BRVO and macular edema and 21 individuals with idiopathic macular hole (MH) serving as controls, vitreous fluid samples were obtained during vitreoretinal surgery, and the levels of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), soluble VEGF receptor 2 (sVEGFR-2), soluble intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (sICAM-1), interleukin 6 (IL-6), monocyte chemotactic protein 1 (MCP-1), pentraxin 3 (PTX3), and pigment epithelium-derived factor (PEDF) were measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.
To investigate relationships among vitreous fluid levels of soluble vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-2 (sVEGFR-2), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), and soluble intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (sICAM-1) in patients with branch retinal vein occlusion (BRVO) and macular edema or patients with idiopathic macular hole.
BRVO patients had a significantly higher vitreous fluid level of sVEGFR-2 (median, 1670 pg/mL; interquartile range [IQL], 1205 to 2225 pg/mL) than macular hole patients (median, 1265 pg/mL; IQR, 731 to 1800 pg/mL; P = .017), as was the case for VEGF (median, 237 pg/mL; IQR, 42.2 to 1305 pg/mL; vs median, 15.6 pg/mL; IQR, 15.6 to 15.6 pg/mL; P &lt; .001) and sICAM-1 (median, 10.1 ng/mL; IQR, 6.3 to 22.5 ng/mL; vs median, 4.1 ng/mL; IQR, 3.3 to 6.0 ng/mL; P &lt; .001).
Vitreous levels of sICAM-1 were significantly increased in vitreous specimens from both PVR (median +/- SD; 12.0 +/- 76.3 ng/ml; P &lt; 0.01) and PDR (8.4 +/- 24.0 ng/ml; P &lt; 0.01) when compared to vitreous from eyes with macular holes (0.
Levels of sICAM-1 in this group were compared with those in vitreous from 31 eyes with RRD without clinical risk factors for PVR, 32 eyes with established PVR and 10 eyes with macular holes.
Vitreous sICAM-1 levels in eyes with RRD at high risk of developing PVR were significantly lower than in eyes with established PVR (p=0.037), but higher than in eyes with macular holes (p &lt;0.0001).
Rare pathogenic alleles with high penetrance and associated haplotypes at 10 loci (CFTR, FAH, HBB, HEXA, LDLR, LPL, PAH, PABP2, PDDR, and SACS) are expressed in probands with cystic fibrosis, tyrosinemia, beta-thalassemia, Tay-Sachs, familial hypercholesterolemia, hyperchylomicronemia, PKU, oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy, pseudo vitamin D deficiency rickets, and spastic ataxia of Charlevoix-Saguenay, respectively) reveal the interpopulation and intrapopulation genetic diversity of Quebec.
Biochemical, neuropathological, and genetic evidence suggests an important role for TCERG1 in Huntington's disease (HD) pathogenesis.
Further investigations on the underlying mechanisms showed that the depletion of dG9a repressed starvation-induced autophagy by controlling the expression level of Atg8a, a critical gene for the progression of autophagy, in a different manner to that in cancer cells.
Bioinformatic analysis of human tumours revealed that several core autophagy genes, including GABARAP, correlate with oncogenic KRAS mutations and poor prognosis in human pancreatic cancer, supporting a potential tumour-suppressive effect of the pathway in Ras-driven human cancers.
Using a yeast two-hybrid screening approach, based on a thyroid cancer patients library, we showed that CDH6 directly interacts with GABARAP, BNIP3 and BNIP3L, and that through these interactions CDH6 restrains autophagy and promotes re-organization of mitochondrial network through a DRP1-mediated mechanism.
We previously reported that GABARAPL1 expression was frequently downregulated in cancer cells while a high GABARAPL1 expression is a good prognosis marker for patients with lymph node-positive breast cancer.
In this study, we asked using qRT-PCR, western blotting and epigenetic quantification whether the expression of the GABARAP family was regulated in breast cancer by epigenetic modifications.
Our data demonstrated that a specific decrease of GABARAPL1 expression in breast cancers was associated with both DNA methylation and histone deacetylation and that CREB-1 recruitment on GABARAPL1 promoter was required for GABARAPL1 expression.
Here we demonstrate that runx1 deletion in mice induces the persistence of MYH10 in platelets, and a similar persistence was observed in platelets of patients with constitutional (familial platelet disorder/acute myeloid leukemia) or acquired (chronic myelomonocytic leukemia) RUNX1 mutations.
MYH10 was also detected in platelets of patients with the Paris-Trousseau syndrome, a thrombocytopenia related to the deletion of the transcription factor FLI1 that forms a complex with RUNX1 to regulate megakaryopoiesis, whereas MYH10 persistence was not observed in other inherited forms of thrombocytopenia.
We propose MYH10 detection as a new and simple tool to identify inherited platelet disorders and myeloid neoplasms with abnormalities in RUNX1 and its associated proteins.
The existence of gynecomastia, age, detection of heterogeneous nodules on ultrasound, and preoperative alpha-fetoprotein and beta HCG are relevant data in relation to histological type of tumor.
List of Abbreviations: AO: Acridine orange, AIDS: Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, ACT: Artemisinin-based combination therapy, CM:Cerebral malaria, BCP:Benzothiocarboxypurine, DDT:Dichloro-diphenyl-trichloroethane, DNA:DeoxyriboNucleic Acid, ELAM-1: Endothelial leukocyte adhesion molecule, G6PD: Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase, HIV: Human immuno deficiency virus, HRP 2: Histidine Rich Protein 2, ICAM -1: Inter cellular adhesion molecule1, ICER: Incremental cost effectiveness ratio, IL-1: Interleukin -1, IFN-g: Interferon-gamma, IgG: Immunoglobulin G, MP: Malaria parasite, NADP: Oxidised Nicotinamide Adenine Dinucleotide Phosphate, NADPH: Reduced Nicotinamide Adenine Dinucleotide Phosphate, PCV: Packed Cell Volume (haematocrit), P. falciparum: Plasmodium falciparum, PLDH: Plasmodium lactate dehydrogenase, PCR: Polymerase Chain Reaction, PPV: Positive predictive value, QBC: Quantitative Buffy Coat examination, TNF: Tumour necrosis factor, NPV: Negative predictive value, RDT: Rapid diagnostic test, SP: Sulphadoxine -Pyrimethamine, SMA: Severe malarial anaemia, UM: Uncomplicated malaria, USA:United States of America, VCAM-1: Vascular cell adhesion molecule, WBC: White Blood Cell, WHO: World Health Organization.
HS intake increased natriuresis, diuresis, and urinary DA while it decreased cortical NOS I expression (P &lt; 0.05 vs. NS), Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate diaphorase (NADPH-d) activity in MD (P &lt; 0.001 vs. NS) and cortical nitrates+nitrites (NOx) production (NS 2.04 +/- 0.22 vs. HS 1.28 +/- 0.10 nmol mg protein-1, P &lt; 0.01).
Decreased G6PD activity and, as a result, decreased NADPH level have been associated with diabetic kidney disease, altered nitric oxide production, aldosterone-mediated endothelial dysfunction, and dialysis-associated anemia.
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency is the most common enzymatic disorder of red blood cells in human subjects, causing hemolytic anemia linked to impaired nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) production and imbalanced redox homeostasis in erythrocytes.
Interestingly, D2 recovery was accompanied by improvements in photosynthetic parameters (Asat and Fv/Fm) and the NADPH/NADP(+) ratio.
HFD significantly enhanced the Asm activity, ceramide production, colocalization of Nlrp3 (Nod-like receptor protein 3) with ASC (apoptosis-associated speck-like protein) or Caspase-1, NADPH-dependent superoxide (O2(*-)) production in glomeruli of Asm(+/+) mice than in control diet-fed mice.
We have studied the effects of growth factors and cytokines on the tumorigenicity and invasion capacity of tumor cells by using regressor and progressor tumor cell lines (ER-1 and ERpP, respectively) derived from an SHR rat mammary adenocarcinoma.
We have studied the effect of growth factors and cytokine on tumorigenesis and invasive capacity of tumor cells by examining a regressor tumor cell line (ER-1) derived from SHR rat mammary adenocarcinoma.
Level of several proteins including haptoglobin, transthyretin, osteopontin, vitronectin, complement factor H and different classes of immunoglobulins are found to be considerably increased in CSF of higher grades of gliomas.
Vitronectin is an extracellular matrix protein, the synthesis of which by glioma cells correlates with tumor grade.
The current study was designed to investigate the relationship between serum vitronectin levels and clinicopathological characteristics, diagnosis and prognosis in glioma patients.
Serum vitronectin levels were significantly elevated in glioma patients as compared with other groups.
Serum vitronectin levels could significantly distinguish glioma patients from other groups and discriminate high-grade glioma from low-grade glioma.
Serum vitronectin may be a promising diagnostic and prognostic biomarker that can be detected in the peripheral blood of patients with glioma.
Bioinformatics analysis emphasized key roles of integrin Beta3, hypoxia and vitronectin and their strong correlations with EGFRvIII expression in malignant glioma patient samples in vivo.
In conclusion, we demonstrate that EGFRvIII/integrin Beta3 complexes promote GBM progression and metastasis in the environment of hypoxia and vitronectin-enrichment, and cilengitide may serve as a promising therapeutics for EGFRvIII-positive GBMs.
Glioma cells derived from the brain of the (12) V-Ha-Ras transgenic mice were used to study the effect of PI-3 kinase inhibitor SF1126 on activation of AKT and ERK signaling, proliferation, vitronectin mediated migration and changes in the distribution of cortical actin on vitronectin in the glioma cells in vitro.
Most notably, treatment of SF1126 blocked integrin-dependent migration in transwell and scratch assays and caused a significant change in the organization and distribution of cortical actin on vitronectin in the glioma cells.
The hit compound 5.3d inhibited invasion and migration of both GBM stem cells (Gli7 and Gli4) and GBM cancer cell lines (C6, SNB75) on fibronectin, vitronectin, and laminin.
In this study, efficient downregulation of cathepsin B and uPAR by siRNA treatments significantly reduced glioma cell adhesion to laminin as compared to vitronectin, fibronectin, or collagen I in U251 and 4910 glioma cell lines.
Necl-5, a cell surface receptor for vitronectin, is expressed in GBM but not normal brain.
These included sudden appearance of tender, erythematous nodular eruptions mimicking ENL, severe constitutional symptoms like high grade fever, malaise, vomiting, epistaxis, joint pain and tenosynovitis simulating Type 2 Lepra Reaction.
OGR1 and TRPC4 are prominently expressed in healthy cerebellar tissue throughout postnatal development and in primary cerebellar medulloblastoma tissues.
Our results suggest that OGR1 enhances expression of TRPC4-containing channels that contribute to enhanced invasion and metastasis of granule precursor-derived human medulloblastoma.
Here, we report that OGR1 and G2A are expressed in human medulloblastoma tissue and its corresponding neuronal cell line.
Two daughters of an affected mother demonstrated symptoms of stage III ADNIV, with posterior uveitis, cystoid macular edema, intraocular fibrosis, retinal neovascularization, retinal degeneration, and cataract.
Visual acuity and features of ADNIV, including inflammatory cells, neovascularization, fibrosis, and cystoid macular edema, were reviewed.
Autosomal dominant neovascular inflammatory vitreoretinopathy (ADNIV) is an inherited eye disease characterized by retinal and iris neovascularization, abnormal retinal pigmentation, anterior chamber and vitreous inflammation, cystoid macular edema, vitreous hemorrhage, and traction retinal detachment.
Common metabolic problems in northeastern Thailand include renal stone disease, distal renal tubular acidosis, hypokalemic periodic paralysis, sudden unexplained nocturnal death and malnutrition-related diabetes mellitus.
High prevalence of CD in presence of anemia and short stature in seropositive FDR in index study indicates need of targeted screening of this subgroup for the presence of CD.CD is unlikely in the absence of HLADQ2/DQ8.
The concurrence of the intracranial multiple primary tumors (MPTs) consisting of acoustic neuroma (AN) and pituitary adenoma is very rare.
Thirty five cases of MPTs were subdivided into three subtypes, i.e., 1) main duct type, 2) branch duct type and 3) peripheral type (mucinous cystadenoma/cystadenocarcinoma).
Together, these data suggest that IL11 could trigger an ER stress response in the placenta, which may contribute to obstetric complications such as preeclampsia.
The relationship between IL-11 and CLS has rarely been reported, especially in patients with colorectal cancer.
Although rare, CLS could be a severe side effect after the administration of IL-11.
We describe four cases of the patients with ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) that were treated with interleukin-11 (IL-11), a cardioprotective cytokine.
The protective role of IL-11, an IL-6 family cytokine, has been implicated in ischemia/reperfusion injury (IRI) in the heart and kidney, but its role has not been elucidated in liver IRI.
Next, IL-11 was injected intraperitoneally (ip) 1 hour before ischemia.
Pertussis toxin gene (ptxA-Pr), insertion sequence genes (IS481 and IS1001), adenylate cyclase genes and structural porin and flagellin genes were chosen as targets for PCR, in different studies.
PCR assays targeting insertion sequence IS481 (IS), pertussis toxin ptxA promoter region (PT), and outer membrane porin (PO), or recA (RA) were evaluated in respiratory specimens collected from 4,442 patients with suspected pertussis.
In this study, we evaluated the role of miR-135b in colorectal cancer (CRC) and its regulatory role for metastasis suppressor-1 (MTSS1) and its mechanisms.
The levels of miR-135b and MTSS1 gene expression in 35 CRC and corresponding cancer-adjacent tissues, 27 colorectal adenoma, and 16 normal tissue samples were quantified using qRT-PCR and western blot analysis.
Jahid and colleagues have shown that miR-23a promotes the transition from indolent to invasive colorectal cancer through inhibition of the MTSS1 tumor suppressor.
To investigate the expression of miR-23a and metastasis suppressor 1 (MTSS1) and their clinical significance in colon carcinoma.
The expression rates of miR-23a and MTSS1 were 87.0% (80/92) and 17.4% (16/92) in colon carcinoma cases, respectively (P &lt; 0.01).
Both the low expression of MTSS1 and high expression of miR-23a may serve as important biological markers for the malignant phenotypes of colon cancer, such as invasion and metastasis.
The aims of this study were to investigate metastasis suppressor 1 (MTSS1) expression in benign and malignant colorectal tissues and to explore its significance in the prognosis of colorectal cancer (CRC) patients.
MTSS1 expression was detected by immunohistochemistry in CRC, colorectal adenomatous polyp (precancerous lesion) and normal colorectal tissues.
These genes (CACNA1C, COL2A1, CPNE8, C3F, C12ORF4, DDX11, GDF11, HOXC8, KCNA1, MDS028, TMEM106C, NR4A1, PHB2, PRICKLE1, Q6ZUQ4, SCN8A, TUBA8 and USP18) are located on porcine chromosome 5 (SSC5) and represent positional and functional candidates for arthrogryposis multiplex congenita (AMC), which maps to SSC5.
In this study, we tested whether this tolerance is intact in systemic lupus erythematosus-prone (New Zealand Black x SWR)F1 mice (SNF1).
The F1 cross between SWR and NZB mice, SNF1, develops severe immune complex glomerulonephritis, in a similar manner to humans with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).
Exposure to bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)-4 was found to enhance a TrkAhigh/CD15-/CD184- neuroblastoma cellular subset, accompanied by a reduction in doublecortin-positive neuroblasts and of NMYC protein expression in SH-SY5Y cells.
In cell-based assays, it is demonstrated that PST3.1a alters the Beta1,6-GlcNAc N-glycans of GBM-initiating cells (GIC) by inhibiting MGAT5 enzymatic activity, resulting in the inhibition of TGFBetaR and FAK signaling associated with doublecortin (DCX) upregulation and increase oligodendrocyte lineage transcription factor 2 (OLIG2) expression.
To assess the expression of Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR-3) and TLR-7 in muscle tissue from patients with polymyositis (PM) and dermatomyositis (DM) and to investigate the function and regulation of TLR-3 in cultured muscle cells.
We analyzed the coding sequences and exon-intron boundaries of GLIALCAM, encoding an IgG-like cell adhesion protein, in 81 individuals with Autism Spectrum Disorders, either with or without comorbid epilepsy, paroxysmal EEG and/or macrocephaly, and the PTEN gene in the subsample with macrocephaly.
Whilst we detected in GLIALCAM several single nucleotide variants without clear pathogenic effects, we found a novel PTEN heterozygous frameshift mutation in one case with "extreme" macrocephaly, autism, intellectual disability and seizures.
In other families with dominant HEPACAM mutations, patients had macrocephaly and mental retardation with or without autism.
Dominant HEPACAM mutations can cause either macrocephaly and mental retardation with or without autism or benign familial macrocephaly.
B AaHHoe NccneAoBaHNe BownN 59 AeTeN c ANcoyHKmyNeN wyHTNpyhweN cNcTeMbl B Bo3pacTe oT 1 roAa Ao 14 neT, npoxoANBwNx ne4eHNe B OeAepanbHoM myeHTpe HeNpoxNpyprNN (HoBocNbNpcK) c 2014 no 2016 r. KpNTepNN BKnh4eHNR B NccneAoBaHNe: 1) Bo3pacT Ha MoMeHT obcneAoBaHNR cTapwe 1 roAa; 2) NMnnaHTamyNR wyHTNpyhweN cNcTeMbl B nepBble 12 Mec XN3HN.
Thus, myocyte autonomous inhibition of PKCalpha protects the adult heart from decompensation and dilated cardiomyopathy after infarction injury in association with a primary enhancement in contractility.
Hypercontractility caused by Prkca deletion protects against heart failure induced by pressure overload, and against dilated cardiomyopathy induced by deleting the gene encoding muscle LIM protein (Csrp3).
Deletion of Prkca also rescues cardiomyopathy associated with overexpression of PP-1.
PD-L1 staining was detected in 80% of anaplastic large cell lymphoma, angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma and follicular dendritic cell sarcoma, 75% of nodular lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin lymphoma, 53% of primary mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma, 39% of extranodal NK/T cell lymphoma, 26% of peripheral T-cell lymphoma, 10% of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and very rare examples of mantle, marginal zone and small lymphocytic lymphomas.
PD-L1 also showed stronger expression in ALK+ ALCL compared with ALK- ALCL, suggesting an additional role of C/EBPBeta in ALK+ ALCL in generating an immunosuppressive environment.
In conclusion, surface antigen expression profiling demonstrates that C/EBPBeta plays a critical role in the activation state of ALK+ ALCL cells and reveals CD147 and PD-L1 as important downstream targets.
Also, the neoplastic cells of classical Hodgkin lymphoma, anaplastic large cell lymphoma, schwannoma, thymoma, and squamous cell carcinoma of various sites frequently expressed PD-L1.
These unique features, which are strictly dependent on NPM-ALK activity and expression, include perpetual cell growth, proliferation, and survival; activation of the key signal transduction pathways STAT3 and mTORC1; and expression of CD30 (the hallmark of anaplastic large-cell lymphoma) and of immunosuppressive cytokine IL-10 and cell-surface protein PD-L1/CD274.
PD-L1 was expressed uniformly by anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL) cell lines, but rarely in B-cell NHL, confined to a subset of diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (DLBCL) with activated B-cell features (3 of 28 cell lines and 24% of primary DLBCL).
Anti-PD-L1 blocking antibody boosted proliferation and IFN-Gamma secretion by allogeneic T cells responding to ALCL and DLBCL cells.
In autologous cultures of primary ALCL and DLBCL, PD-L1 blockade enhanced secretion of inflammatory cytokines IFN-Gamma, granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor, interleukin (IL)-1, IL-6, IL-8, IL-13, TNF-Alfa, and macrophage inflammatory protein-1Alfa.
We examined B7-H1 expression in anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL) and Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) and found that it was constitutively expressed in both clinical samples and cell lines.
In anaplastic lymphoma kinase-positive (ALK(+)) ALCL cells, B7-H1 expression was suppressed by the blocking of extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) signaling and upregulated by the augmentation of ERK activity by phorbol 13-myristate 12-acetate stimulation, suggesting that B7-H1 expression is regulated by ERK signaling pathway in ALCL.
ERK is one of the downstream mediators of nucleophosmin (NPM)/ALK signaling in ALK(+)ALCL, and pharmacological inhibition of ALK was shown to dephosphorylate ERK and down-regulate B7-H1.
The involvement of NPM/ALK in B7-H1 expression was also demonstrated by introducing the construct into human non-ALCL lymphoid cell lines, which resulted in B7-H1 expression.
These results suggest that B7-H1 expression is controlled by common ERK signaling pathways in ALCL and HL cells.
The applicability of clinical genetics in nephrology is due to the fact that many kidney diseases are characterized by genetic mutations (e.g., von-Hippel Lindau syndrome, MYH9 related disorders, Fabry's syndrome, Liddle's and Bartter's Syndrome, and others).
In this study, we tested the hypothesis that a common single nucleotide polymorphism rs16996677 in the MYH9 gene may contribute to the etiology of DN in type 2 diabetes (T2D) in a Taiwanese population with T2D.
It has been demonstrated that Wnt signaling through the secretion of Wnt inhibitors, such as DKK1, sFRP-2, and sFRP-3, plays a key role in the decreased osteoblast activity associated with multiple myeloma (MM) bone disease.
The authors studied the methylation status of CDKN2A, CDKN2B, XAF1, CDH13, JUNB and a panel of soluble Wnt inhibitors including WIF1, DKK3, APC, SFRP1, SFRP2, SFRP4 and SFRP5 by methylation-specific PCR in 31 bone marrow and 21 peripheral blood samples of patients with essential thrombocythaemia.
We studied the activity of Wnt signaling and the methylation status of WIF1, DKK3, APC, SFRP1, SFRP2, SFRP4 and SFRP5 by methylation-specific PCR in myeloma cell lines and primary myeloma samples.
On the other hand, myeloma cells suppress osteoblast function by the secretion of osteoblast inhibiting factors, e.g., the Wnt inhibitors DKK-1 and sFRP-2.
Hedgehog signaling is frequently activated in esophageal cancer, gastric cancer and pancreatic cancer due to transcriptional upregulation of Hedgehog ligands and epigenetic silencing of HHIP1/HHIP gene, encoding the Hedgehog inhibitor.
Sel-1-like (SEL1L) is a putative tumor suppressor gene that is significantly downregulated in human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA).
SEL1L is a putative tumor suppressor gene that is frequently down-regulated in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA).
Using a functional genomic approach, we identified a seven-gene panel (TNC, TFPI, TGFBI, SEL-1L, L1CAM, WWTR1, and CDC42BPA) that was differentially expressed across three different expression platforms, including pancreatic tumor/normal samples.
Previously, it was reported that SEL1L is able to decrease the aggressive behavior of human pancreatic tumor cells both in vitro and in vivo.
To gain insights into the involvement of SEL1L in tumor invasion, we performed gene expression analysis on the pancreatic cancer cell line Suit-2 subjected to two complementary strategies: upregulation and downregulation of SEL1L expression by stable transfection of the entire cDNA under an inducible promoter and by RNA-mediated interference.
The gene SEL1L is involved both in human breast and pancreatic cancer progression.
Recent data suggest that SEL1L may play an important role in pancreatic carcinoma, similar to breast cancer, where the expression of SEL1L has been associated with a reduction in both proliferative activity in vitro and clinical tumor aggressiveness.
To investigate this possibility, we examined the expression of Sel1L in a series of primary pancreatic carcinomas by immunohistochemistry and characterized the effects of Sel1L overexpression both in vitro and in vivo.
In 74 pancreatic cancers analysed, 36% lacked Sel1L expression, although there was no significant correlation between the expression of Sel1L and any clinicopathologic parameter, including survival.
Overexpression of SEL1L in stably transfected pancreatic cancer cells caused both a decrease in clonogenicity and anchorage-independent growth as well as a significant increase in the levels of activin A and SMAD4.
Thus, it can be hypothesized that Sel1L plays an important function in the growth and aggressiveness of pancreatic carcinoma.
Levels of angiogenic markers bFGF, angiogenin and VEGF in EBC significantly discriminated between 17 individuals with newly detected NSCLC versus stable and exacerbated chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients as well as healthy volunteers.
Hereditary amyloidosis of the Finnish type (HAF, or familial amyloid polyneuropathy type IV) is an autosomal dominant disease that has been described most commonly in the Finnish population but has also been found in some other countries.
Plasma fibrinogen, FII, FV, FVII, FVIII, FIX, FX, FXI and FXII activity levels and C4BP concentrations were determined in 73 patients with non-metastatic colorectal cancer (48 colon and 25 rectum) and in 67 matched control subjects.
Mean plasma concentrations of fibrinogen (functional and antigen), FVIII, FIX, FV and C4BP were significantly higher in colorectal cancer patients than in control subjects, while FVII and FXII levels were significantly decreased.
In colorectal cancer patients high plasma fibrinogen, FVIII and FIX levels might represent further risk factors for venous thrombotic complications in the immediate post-surgery period, while decreased FVII and FXII concentrations may be an index of intravascular coagulation activation, still in a subclinical phase.
Complications of PPROM include prematurity, chorioamnionitis, neonatal sepsis, limb position defects, respiratory distress syndrome, pulmonary hypoplasia chronic lung disease, periventricular leukomalacia and intraventricular haemorrhage.A number of different sealing techniques have been employed which aim to restore a physical barrier against infection and encourage the re-accumulation of amniotic fluid.
NL infants were unexposed to PPROM or maternal hypertension, had highest requirement for surfactant, did not develop IVH and periventricular leukomalacia (PVL) and none of them were Caucasian.
Molecular analysis indicated that the livers of BDNF mutants fed HFD contained elevated levels of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha (Pparalpha or Ppara as listed in the MGI Database) and fibroblast growth factor 21 (Fgf21) transcripts compared with WTs.
We measured the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and plasma concentrations of interleukin (IL)-1Alfa, IL-1Beta, IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, IL-10, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-Alfa, TNF-Beta, interferon (IFN)-Gamma, the IL-1 receptor antagonist, and soluble IL-4 receptor (sIL-4r) by ELISA in 12 patients each with acute, monosymptomatic, idiopathic optic neuritis (ON), ON as part of MS, other attack forms of MS, and in neurological control subjects.
We have reported previously that ocular infection of different strains of mice with recombinant herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) constitutively expressing interleukin-2 (IL-2) provokes central nervous system (CNS) demyelination and optic neuropathy, as determined by changes in visual evoked cortical potentials and pathological changes in the optic nerve and CNS, whereas recombinant viruses expressing IL-4, gamma interferon, IL-12p35, IL-12p40, or IL-12p70 do not induce this neuropathy.
The objective of this study was to detect interleukin-17 (IL-17), interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma), interleukin-4 (IL-4) and forkhead/winged helix transcription factor p3 (Foxp3) protein and gene expression of the optic nerve and to further explore the role of T helper cell subsets such as Th1, Th2, Th17 and Treg in the pathogenesis of optic neuritis in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE).
In MS and optic neuritis, IL-4 mRNA expressing cells predominated, followed by TGF-beta- and IFN-gamma-positive cells.
GKN1, GKN2, and the trefoil factors TFF1 and TFF3 were examined in tissue microarrays from 155 distal gastric adenocarcinomas.
Loss of GKN1 and GKN2 expression occurs frequently in gastric adenocarcinomas, especially in the diffuse subtype.
Since RIs significantly correlate with renal function, they have been proposed to be independent risk factors for CKD progression, besides proteinuria, low GFR and arterial hypertension.
High uterine artery Doppler resistance indexes (RIs) are predictive of placental complications of pregnancy, such as preeclampsia, fetal growth restriction, and stillbirth.
Patients with hypertension or diabetes mellitus showed higher RIs (p &lt; 0.05) than those without the ailments.
Myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and myeloproliferative disorders are rare in children; they are divided into low-grade MDS (refractory cytopenia of childhood [RCC]), advanced MDS (refractory anemia with excess blasts in transformation), and juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML), each with different characteristics and management strategies.
Thus, genetic ablation or pharmacologic inhibition of Shp2 suppresses the leukemogenic effect of Pten loss, yet simultaneously induces severe anemia in mice with Pten deficiency in blood cells.
Surprisingly, the Shp2 and Pten double-knockout mice suffered lethal anemia, a phenotype that reveals previously unappreciated cooperative roles of Pten and Shp2 in erythropoiesis.
Consistently, treatment of Pten-deficient mice with a specific Shp2 inhibitor suppressed myeloproliferative neoplasm while causing anemia.
Infants with non-metabolic disorders (n = 34); 10 (three neuroblastoma [NBL], three brain tumor, two acute meylogenous leukemia [AML], one rhabdomyosarcoma, and one retinoblastoma) received auto HSCT, and 24 (eight hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis [HLH], four juvenile meylomonocytic leukemia [JMML], four Wiscott-Aldrych Syndrome [WAS], three acute lymphoblastic leukemia [ALL], two AML, one severe aplastic anemia [SAA], one chronic granulomatous disease [CGD], and one amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia) received allo HSCT.
The human choroideremia-like (CHML) gene and a locus for Usher syndrome type 2 (USH2) were recently mapped to the 1q31-qter region employing physical mapping and genetic linkage studies, respectively.
To investigate a possible role of the CHML gene in the pathogenesis of USH2, we investigated 10 Dutch and 9 Danish USH2 patients for point mutations in the open reading frame of the CHML gene.
These results suggest that CHML is not involved in the pathogenesis of USH2.
We hypothesized that the Hrad17 may be expressed in thymoma, especially in invasive thymoma.
We attempted to determine the influence of Hrad17 expression on clinicopathological features for patients with thymoma who had undergone surgery.
Expression of Hrad17 messenger ribonucleic acid (RNA) was evaluated by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction using a LightCycler in 38 thymomas and 10 adjacent histologically normal thymus samples from patients for whom follow-up data was available.
No relationship was seen between Hrad17 gene expression and age, gender, or pathological thymoma subtypes.
Hrad17 mRNA expression in invasive thymomas (stage II-IV, 10.067 +/- 5.293) was significantly higher than that in stage I thymomas (5.193 +/- 4.485, p = 0.0168).
Immunohistochemistry showed that Hrad17 protein was highly expressed in invasive thymoma tumor tissue but not within the normal thymus tissue.
Hrad17 was highly expressed in invasive thymoma.
In induced apical periodontitis, osteoblastic expression of SIRT6 was significantly suppressed (P = 0.001) which was associated with significantly elevated levels of LDHA (P = 0.003) and 8-OHdG (P = 0.004) and significantly enhanced recruitment of macrophages (P = 0.004).
The main objective of this work was to evaluate a new therapeutic strategy against a colitis-related colorectal cancer in vivo and in vitro by targeting mTOR-signaling and lactate dehydrogenase A.
There were striking laboratory abnormalities in the groups diagnosed with toxic hepatitis (mean peak values: AST 775 +/- 464 U/L, ALT 400 +/- 447 U/L, ALP 767 +/- 408 U/L, LDH 1,469 +/- 779 U/L).
To determine Lactate Dehydrogenase Activity (LDHA) in whole saliva in individuals with periodontal disease and the effect of ultrasonic scaling on this enzyme activity.
LDH-1 activity was detected to be significantly higher in the sterile cirrhotic ascites when compared with spontaneous bacterial peritonitis, malignant ascites, tuberculous ascites and congestive heart failure-related ascites.
Hirudin variants (HV1 and HV2) were produced in infected insect cells as secreted proteins by joining their coding sequences to the leader peptide sequence of the vescicular stomatitis virus G protein.
Macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) is a proinflammatory cytokine involved in systemic, autoimmune, and inflammatory diseases, such as obesity, rheumatoid arthritis, and systemic lupus erythematosus.
To systematically review evidence regarding the relationship between circulating macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) levels and rheumatoid arthritis (RA), and the association between MIF gene polymorphisms and RA susceptibility.
To investigate the role of macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) in the pathogenesis of ankylosing spondylitis (AS).
Rheumatoid SAAT secreted more adiponectin and macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) than respective osteoarthritis tissue.
Macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) has emerged as a promising drug target in diseases including sepsis, rheumatoid arthritis, and cancer.
Macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), as crucial parameters of angiogenesis and inflammation, were evaluated to identify the role of cyclic citrullinated peptide antibodies (anti-CCP) during angiogenesis in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and psoriatic arthritis (PsA).
The aim of this study was to search for any difference between the serum levels of OPG, FGF-23, and vitamin D in patients with hypogonadism and the healthy controls.
These include FGF3 in Michel aplasia; FGF8 in cleft lip/palate and in hypogonadotropic hypogonadism; FGF9 in carcinoma; FGF10 in the lacrimal/salivary glands aplasia, and lacrimo-auriculo-dento-digital syndrome; FGF14 in spinocerebellar ataxia; FGF20 in Parkinson disease; and FGF23 in tumoral calcinosis and hypophosphatemic rickets.
Recent studies using genetically modified mice, such as FGF23-/- and Klotho-/- mice that exhibit altered mineral homeostasis due to a high vitamin D activity showed features of premature aging that include retarded growth, osteoporosis, atherosclerosis, ectopic calcification, immunological deficiency, skin and general organ atrophy, hypogonadism and short lifespan.
Moreover, Fgf23(-/-)/klotho(-/-) mice show soft tissue and vascular calcification, severe muscle wasting, hypogonadism, pulmonary emphysema, distention of intestinal wall, and skin atrophy, all of which are also seen in Fgf23(-/-) and klotho(-/-) mice.
Recent studies using genetically altered mouse models, such as in Fgf-23(-/-) and klotho mutant mice, that exhibit altered mineral ion metabolism due to high vitamin D activities showed features of premature aging that include atherosclerosis, emphysema, osteopenia/osteoporosis, hypogonadism, soft tissue calcifications and generalized atrophy of organs; the pathologic effects of vitamin D in these mouse models are obvious, as diminution or genetic ablation of the vitamin D pathway ameliorated most of the above-mentioned phenotypes, by reversing mineral ion metabolism, and the resultant effect being prolonged survival of the mutant mice.
Clinical, cytogenetic and molecular features of acute myeloid leukemia with a MLL-SEPT5 fusion gene are reviewed.
The MLL-LCX fusion protein lacked a CXXC domain of LCX, but retained an alpha-helical coiled-coil region at the COOH terminus, similar to MLL-SEPTING, MLL-CDCREL1, MLL-AF1p/Eps15, and MLL-AF6, which suggests that these fusion proteins are involved in the pathogenesis of 11q23-associated leukemia through similar mechanisms.
We also investigated TG101348 activity against feeder cells and observed that STAT5 phosphorylation, granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor, and interleukin 6 levels decreased, indicating reduced cytokine production in HS-5 cells treated with TG101348.
In the present study, we examined the impact of cytoplasmic/mitochondrial localization of p33ING1b in oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) patient samples and explored the therapeutic potential of adenovirally-overexpressed p33ING1b in OSCC cell lines in combination with ionizing radiation (IR) treatment.
In contrast with previous reports, we found that p33ING1b protein and mRNA levels are higher in OSCC compared to normal epithelial cells.
In OSCC patient samples, higher levels of intra-tumoral cytoplasmic p33ING1b correlated with increased apoptotic markers and significantly better patient survival.
IR treatment induced p33ING1b translocation to the mitochondria and adenoviral-p33ING1b synergized with IR to kill OSCC cells.
Our results identify a novel functional relationship between cytoplasmic p33ING1b and patient survival and highlight the potential for the use of p33ING1b as a therapeutic agent in combination with adjuvant radiotherapy in OSCC.
Since loss of heterozygosity at 13q34 has been reported in squamous cell carcinoma of head and neck, we screened for mutations in ING1 by polymerase chain reaction-single strand conformation polymorphism in 71 oral squamous cell carcinomas (OSCC) from India, 15 of which were known to harbor p53 mutations.
These results suggest that ING1 is not a target for mutational inactivation in OSCC of Indians.
The incidence of human T cell lymphotropic virus type 1 (HLTV-1)-associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis (HAM/TSP) is not well defined in the literature.
Following adult T cell leukemia/lymphoma and HLTV-1-associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis, HTLV-1 uveitis (HU) has been established as a distinct clinical entity caused by HTLV-1 based on seroepidemiological, clinical, and virological studies.
This is a study of the early identification of a new case of tropical spastic paraparesis/HLTV-1-associated myelopathy in a Spanish patient not previously reported on.
Myxoid liposarcoma (MLS) is a soft tissue sarcoma characterized by a recurrent t(12;16) translocation.
Although myxoid liposarcomas (MLS) are the most common type of soft-tissue sarcomas in adults, their primary location in the superficial tissues is rare.
PRG4 is one of the downstream molecules of the myxoid liposarcoma (MLS)-specific fusion oncoproteins TLS-CHOP and EWS-CHOP.
The SUV max values of the low-grade thymomas, high-grade thymomas, TCs and MLs were 3.14 +/- 0.73, 4.34 +/- 1.49, 8.59 +/- 3.05, and 10.08 +/- 2.53, respectively, with significant differences between the low- and high-grade thymomas, and between TCs and MLs.
Of 24 patients with actionable mutations, five were given genotype-matched drugs corresponding to actionable mutations: everolimus to PIK3CA mutation in parotid carcinosarcoma (partial response) and tracheal squamous cell carcinoma (stable disease; 21% reduction), sorafenib to PDGFRA mutation in auditory canal adenocarcinoma (partial response), sorafenib to BRAF mutation in microcytic adnexal carcinoma (progressive disease), and afatinib to ERBB2 mutation in esophageal adenocarcinoma (progressive disease).
The objective of this study was to determine the efficacy of neratinib in the treatment of HER2 amplified carcinosarcoma.
The efficacy of neratinib in the treatment of HER2 amplified carcinosarcoma was determined in vitro using seven primary carcinosarcoma cell lines with differential expression of HER2/neu.
The efficacy of neratinib was determined in treating mice harboring HER2 amplified carcinosarcoma xenografts.
Two of seven (28.5%) carcinosarcoma cell lines were HER2/neu amplified.
HER2/neu amplified cell lines SARARK6 and SARARK9 were significantly more sensitive to neratinib than the five non-HER2/neu amplified carcinosarcoma cell lines (mean+/-SEM IC50:0.014myM+/-0.004vs.0.164myM+/-0.019 p=0.0003).
Neratinib inhibited tumor growth (p=0.012) and prolonged survival in mice harboring HER2 amplified carcinosarcoma xenografts (p=0.0039).
Neratinib inhibits HER2 amplified carcinosarcoma proliferation, signaling, cell cycle progression and tumor growth in vitro.
Numerous correlative scientific investigations have demonstrated that the HER2 (ERBB2) gene is amplified in 17%-33% of carcinosarcoma, uterine serous carcinoma, and a subset of high-grade endometrioid endometrial tumors.
The analysis of human datasets and GBM tumors revealed higher expression of p65 in GBM-associated CD68+ macrophages compared to neighboring stroma.
Of paramount importance in the recognition of oligodendroglial and astrocytic tumor cells were the double immunostainings for ATRX/GFAP, ATRX/IDH1R132H, ATRX/Iba-1 and ATRX/CD68.
Therefore, Dan-gua Fang might be an ideal drug for comprehensive intervention for glucose and lipid metabolism disorders in type 2 diabetes mellitus.
An electrochemical study of the oxidation of 8-hydroxyguanine (8-OH-Gua) at gold nanoparticles attached to single walled carbon nanotube modified edge plane pyrolytic graphite electrode (AuNP-SWCNT/EPPGE) has been carried out to develop a method for the self diagnosis of diabetes.
Consequently, Metformin - the biguanide drug of choice orally administered for diabetes type II - is anticipated to see a spike in production.
To study the toxicity features of high glucose on the endothelial cell cycle and the influence of Dan Gua-Fang, a Chinese herbal compound prescription, on the reproductive cycle of vascular endothelial cells cultivated under a high glucose condition; to reveal the partial mechanisms of Dan Gua-Fang in the prevention and treatment of endothelial injury caused by hyperglycemia in diabetes mellitus (DM); and offer a reference for dealing with the vascular complications of DM patients with long-term high blood glucose.
To study the effect of anticolchicine cytotoxicity of Dan Gua-Fang, a Chinesea Chinese), a Chinese herbal compound prescription on endothelial cells of vein (ECV304) cultivated in mediums of different glucose concentrations as well as the proliferation of those cells in the same conditions, in order to reveal the value of Dan Gua-Fang in preventing and treating endothelial damage caused by hyperglycemia in diabetes mellitus.
(1) Dan Gua-Fang at all concentrations reduced the floating cell population of ECV304 cultivated in hyperglycemia mediums.
(2) Dan Gua-Fang at all concentrations and hyperglycemia both had a function of promoting "pseudopod-like" structure formation in cultivated ECV304, but the function was not superimposed in mediums containing both hyperglycemia and Dan Gua-Fang.
(3) Colchicine reduced and even vanished the "pseudopod-like" structure of the endotheliocyte apparently cultivated in mediums of hyperglycemia or with Dan Gua-Fang.
The "pseudopod-like" structure of the endotheliocyte emerged quickly in Dan Gua-Fang groups after colchicine was removed, but it was not the case in hyperglycemia only without Dan Gua-Fang groups.
The spinodal point concentration of statistical significance of hyperglycemia cytotoxicity is 22.2 mmol/l; 1/300 Dan Gua can reverse the endothelia cytotoxicity in different concentrations of hyperglycemia.
Patients with resected stage III colon cancer who were 18 years of age or older, with an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status of 0 or 1, from four randomised controlled trials (NSABP C-08, XELOXA, X-ACT, and AVANT; 8734 patients in total) were pooled and analysed.
Based on the results of the X-ACT study, capecitabine has become one of the standard postoperative adjuvant chemotherapies for colon cancer.
In the adjuvant setting, the Xeloda in Adjuvant Colon Cancer Therapy (X-ACT) trial demonstrated that capecitabine as a single agent led to improvement in relapse-free survival (hazard ratio: 0.86, 95% confidence interval: 0.74-0.99, P = 0.04) and was associated with significantly fewer adverse events than 5-FU plus leucovorin (LV, folinic acid).
On the basis of the X-ACT trial, capecitabine was approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration, the National Institute for Clinical Excellence, and the Scottish Medicines Consortium as monotherapy for the adjuvant treatment of stage III colon cancer.
The Xeloda in Adjuvant Colon Cancer Therapy (X-ACT) study confirmed that capecitabine (Xeloda) is at least as effective and is less toxic than a bolus 5-FU and leucovorin regimen for patients with stage III colon cancer.
In the recent X-ACT (Xeloda in Adjuvant Colon cancer Therapy) trial, oral capecitabine (Xeloda) demonstrated superior efficacy and an improved safety profile compared with infused fluorouracil + leucovorin (folinic acid) [FU+LV] in patients with Dukes' C colorectal cancer.
The X-ACT trial (Xeloda in Adjuvant Colon Cancer Therapy) compared traditional bolus 5-FU/LV (as per the Mayo Clinic regimen) with capecitabine, in the adjuvant treatment of 1987 stage III colon cancer patients.
On the basis of the X-ACT trial, capecitabine was approved by the US FDA, the National Institute for Clinical Excellence and the Scottish Medicines Consortium as monotherapy for the adjuvant treatment of stage III colon cancer.
In order to specifically target GD2 overexpressed on the surface of neuroblastoma stNB-V1 cells, anti-GD2 was conjugated to chitosan modified GNRs (CGNRs).
Our results illustrated that anti-GD2-conjugated CGNRs were extensively endocytosed by GD2+ stNB-V1 neuroblastoma cells via antibody-mediated endocytosis.
In order to specifically target disialoganglioside (GD2) overexpressed on the surface of neuroblastoma stNB-V1 cells, GD2 monoclonal antibody (anti-GD2) was conjugated to acidified CNTs.
In addition to the well-known increase in glial fibrillary acidic protein and other proteins in reactive astrocytes, astrocytopathy is evidenced by deposition of abnormal proteins such as Beta-amyloid, hyper-phosphorylated tau, abnormal Alfa-synuclein, mutated huntingtin, phosphorylated TDP-43 and mutated SOD1, and PrPres , in Alzheimer's disease, tauopathies, Lewy body diseases, Huntington's disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, respectively.
Interestingly, BAG3-mediated selective macroautophagy is also involved in the clearance of aggregated proteins associated with age-related neurodegenerative disorders, like Alzheimer's disease (tau-protein), Huntington's disease (mutated huntingtin/polyQ proteins), and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (mutated SOD1).
This report is the first successful generation of neural cells using iPSCs from sleep bruxism patients with 5-HT2A polymorphism, which has the potential to elucidate the etiology and underlying mechanism of SB.
At present, variants of the 5-hydroxytryptamine receptor 2A (5-HTR2A) and interleukin-6 (IL-6) genes may be susceptible markers to develop for obstructive sleep apnea-hypopnea syndrome (OSAHS).
The results of our study showed that tumor necrosis factor-Alfa (TNF-Alfa) -308 G/A (OR = 3.70, 95 % CI = 1.39-9.83), gene-linked polymorphic region (LPR) (OR = 0.57, 95 % CI = 0.41-0.79), and variable number tandem repeat (VNTR) of the 5-hydroxytryptamine transporter gene (5-HTT) (OR = 3.44, 95 % CI = 1.49-7.95) polymorphisms were associated with OSAS risk in the Chinese population, while there was no significant association between 5-hydroxytryptamine 2A receptor (5-HTR2A) 102C/T, 5-HTR2A A1438G, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) insertion (I)/deletion (D), or leptin receptor (LEPR)-Gln 223Arg polymorphism and risk of OSAS in the Chinese population.
Our study demonstrated that TNF-Alfa 308 G/A, 5-HTT LPR, and 5-HTT-VNTR polymorphisms were associated with OSAS risk, whereas little association was observed between 5-HTR2A 102C/T, 5-HTR2A A1438G, ACE I/D, or LEPR-Gln 223Arg polymorphism and risk of OSAS in the Chinese population.
We performed a meta-analysis to better evaluate the associations between 5-HT2A, 5-HTT, and LEPR polymorphisms, and OSAS.
5-HT2A, 5-HTT, and LEPR polymorphisms and OSAS were identified in PubMed and EMBASE.
The -1438 "A" allele of 5-HT2A was identified as a candidate genetic risk factor for OSAS (OR: 2.33, 95%CI 1.49-3.66).
There was no significant association between 5-HT2A 102C/T and OSAS risk, using any model.
Eight studies were finally included in the meta-analysis of the association between 5-HTR2A gene variants (including 102T/C and 1438G/A), 5-HTT gene polymorphisms (including 5-HTT gene-linked promoter region (5-HTTLRP), and serotonin transporter intron 2 variable number tandem repeat (STin2VNTR) and OSAS risk.
The G allele of 5-HTR2A 1438G/A, long 5-HTTLPR, and 10-tandem-repeats STin2VNTR were shown to increase OSAS susceptibility, with ORs of 2.33 (A vs. G, 95% CI 1.48-3.66), 1.24 (L vs. S, 95% CI: 1.04-1.49), and 2.87 (10 vs. 12, 95% CI: 1.38-5.97), respectively.
Of the 5-HTR2A 1438G/A gene polymorphism, the AA genotype increased the OSAS risk, with an OR of 4.21 (95% CI: 2.83-6.25) in a recessive model in male OSAS patients, but no significant association was found in females.
Our meta-analysis demonstrated that polymorphisms in the 5-HTR2A 1438G/A and 5-HTT genes contributed to susceptibility to OSAS.
The serotonin 2A (5-HT2A) receptor has been implicated in obstructive sleep apnea (OSA).
Our findings suggest that upregulated functional TRPC5 gene may be one cause of EPO-induced hypertension in patients with chronic kidney disease.
TTR (transthyretin) gene could be a possible candidate for lumbosacral stenosis in Labrador retrievers based on previous human studies that have reported an association between human lumbar spinal stenosis and transthyretin protein amyloidosis.
Wild-type ATTR amyloidosis mainly involves the heart, although the reported occurrence of bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome, spinal stenosis and biceps tendon rupture in these patients speaks to more generalized protein deposition.
In all groups, but the HBD group, the livers were pretreated with FK506 and prostaglandin I2 analogue, and were preserved in University of Wisconsin solution after cardiac arrest.
We used a new vasodilator, TTC-909 (a prostaglandin I2 analog incorporated in lipid microspheres), which produced marked reduction in the pulmonary arterial pressure and resistance in an infant with primary pulmonary hypertension.
A prostaglandin I2 (PGI2) was administered before cardiac arrest by St. Thomas solution.
Recently, with the introduction of prostacyclin (Prostaglandin I2, epoprostenon) as a potent vasodilator, several reports have shown a positive effect in primary pulmonary hypertension.
Furthermore, the involvement of functional GREM1 in the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) process of glioma was investigated by detecting the expression levels of glioma-associated oncogene homologue 3 (GLI3) and EMT-related molecules.
Suppression of GLI1/GLI2 functions by a C-terminus truncated GLI3 repressor mutant (GLI3R), or by GANT61, a pharmacological inhibitor of GLI1/GLI2, reduced hTERT protein expression in human colon cancer, prostate cancer and Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) cell lines.
Inhibitor of DNA binding protein-1 (ID1) has been shown to maintain the self-renewal capacity of neural stem cells and might be involved in the therapeutic resistance of GBM.
In glioblastoma neurosphere cultures that contain cancer stem cells (GBM-CSCs), the bHLH family member inhibitors of DNA binding protein 2 and 4 (Id2 and Id4) were found to be upregulated during the differentiation of GBM-CSCs in response to histone deacetylase inhibitors.
The improvement in mitral regurgitation was greater for the mitral repair group (-2.1 +/- 0.3 vs -1.1 +/- 0.8, P &lt; .0001), and mitral regurgitation remained significantly lower on follow-up at 6 months or more (0.6 +/- 0.4 0.9 +/- 0.2, P = .002).
This study was undertaken to examine changes in 1-cysPrx expression in human cataract samples, human lens epithelial (HLE B3) cell line, and rat organ-cultured lenses in response to oxidative insult induced by H2O2 or transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1).
In a functional analysis, transient cotransfections in nonerythroid NIH/3T3 cells of SP1, SP3, BKLF, or EKLF and HS2 epsilony promoter-luciferase constructs, with or without coactivators (p300, CREB-binding protein [CBP], or p300/CBP-associated factor [PCAF]) and SCFAs, were performed.
Using our newly created Ngb overexpressing transgenic (Ngb-Tg) mice, we measured brain infarction on day 1 and day 14 after transient focal cerebral ischemia and performed neurobehavioral assessments in sensorimotor deficits on days 1, 3, 7, and 14.
Compared with wild-type controls, brain infarction volumes 1 day and 14 days after transient focal cerebral ischemia were significantly reduced in Ngb-Tg mice.
Evidence includes the observations that neuronal hypoxia and cerebral ischemia induce Ngb expression, that enhancing Ngb expression reduces--and knocking down Ngb expression increases--hypoxic neuronal injury in vitro and ischemic cerebral injury in vivo, and that Ngb-overexpressing transgenic mice are resistant to cerebral infarction.
Sono stati presentati i casi di un effetto paradosso di aggressivita sotto la possibile influenza di acepromazina e un protocollo modificato per il trattamento di un avvelenamento da permetrina nei gatti.
ADRP and perilipin localized to the phagosomal membrane, which contains M. leprae in skin biopsy specimens of lepromatous leprosy.
In this work, two novel exonic BCKDK mutations, c.520C&gt;G/p.R174G and c.1166T&gt;C/p.L389P, were identified at the homozygous state in two unrelated children with persistently reduced body fluid levels of branched-chain amino acids (BCAAs), developmental delay, microcephaly, and neurobehavioral abnormalities.
AR-12-stimulated the co-localization of Influenza, EBV and HIV virus proteins with LC3 in autophagosomes and reduced viral protein association with the chaperones HSP90, HSP70, and GRP78.
Hence, in agreement with heat shock protein 70 (HSP70) acting as Th1 cytokine-like adjuvant, an Escherichia coli-expressed r4M2e.HSP70c fusion protein comprising C-terminus of Mycobacterium tuberculosis HSP70 genetically fused to four tandem repeats of influenza A virus M2e was constructed.
Furthermore, a virus challenge experiment revealed that mice vaccinated with r4M2e.HSP70c limited the severity of influenza A disease by 100% survival rate, less sever body weight loss and delaying the onset of morbidity in mice for 2days rather than other control groups.
To prepare an effective vaccine against influenza A viruses, a chimerical DNA plasmid encoding Influenza virus M2 protein and Leishmania major HSP70 was constructed.
Our previous study have shown that a prime-boost administration of recombinant 4xM2e.HSP70c (r4M2e/H70c) fusion protein compared to conventional HA-based influenza vaccines provided full protection against lethal dose of influenza A viruses in mice.
The data reported herein show that protection against H9N2 viral challenge was significantly increased in chickens by injection of r4M2e/H70c compared with injection of conventional HA-based influenza vaccine adjuvanted with MF59 or recombinant 4xM2e (r4M2e) without HSP70c.
This protective immunity might be attributed to enhanced cell-mediated immunity, which is interpreted as increased lymphocytes proliferation, increased levels of Th1-type (IFN-Gamma) and Th2-type (IL-4) cytokines production and increased CD4(+) to CD8(+) ratios, resulting from the injection of four tandem repeats of the ectodomain of the conserved influenza matrix protein M2 (4xM2e) genetically fused to C-terminus of Mycobacterium tuberculosis HSP70 (mHSP70c).
Heat shock protein 70 (Hsp70) was identified as a cellular interaction partner of the influenza virus ribonucleoprotein (RNP) complex.
Here we demonstrated that Hsp70 was involved in the regulation of influenza A viral transcription and replication.
Furthermore, delivered Hsp70 could inhibit the replication of influenza A virus in mice.
In this study, antigenic peptides from tetanus toxin and influenza hemagglutinin complexed to human stress-inducible Hsp70 were found to enhance the proliferation and cytokine production of human antigen-specific CD4(+) T cells.
Herein, to construct a recombinant M2e-based vaccine candidate with the appropriate structural conformation and immunogenicity the corresponding nucleotide sequence from an H9N2 influenza strain was fused to the N-terminus of the truncated Mycobacterium tuberculosis HSP70(359-610), as a potent adjuvant, and following its cloning into the pPICZ alpha A plasmid the fusion gene was expressed in Pichia pastoris KM71H yeast.
According to previous reports, this study was designed to produce a novel influenza A virus recombinant fusion protein consisted of M2e, a potent immunogenic protein from influenza A virus, fused to C-terminal domain of mycobacterium tuberculosis HSP70, HSP70(359-610), as a carrier and adjuvant.
De novo mutations in ATAD3A (ATPase family AAA-domain containing protein 3A) were recently found to cause a neurological syndrome with developmental delay, hypotonia, spasticity, optic atrophy, axonal neuropathy, and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
We identified a recurrent de novo ATAD3A c.1582C&gt;T (p.Arg528Trp) variant by whole-exome sequencing (WES) in five unrelated individuals with a core phenotype of global developmental delay, hypotonia, optic atrophy, axonal neuropathy, and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
Immunoblot and mass spectrometry analyses revealed that the 800-kDa complex contained the OMM translocator protein (18-kDa) and VDAC along with IMM CYP11A1, ATPase family AAA domain-containing protein 3A (ATAD3A), and optic atrophy type 1 proteins, but not ANT.
Knockdown of ATAD3A, but not ANT or optic atrophy type 1, in Leydig cells resulted in a significant decrease in hormone-induced, but not 22R-hydroxycholesterol-supported, steroid production.
So, we attempted to evaluate the association between dopamine D2 (DRD2) receptor, serotonergic (5HT2A) receptor and CYP2D6 gene polymorphisms and response to treatment with risperidone in persons with schizophrenia from North India.
We identified 60 miRNAs that were significantly increased in recurrent serous ovarian carcinoma compared with primary tumor tissue, including miR-630, miR-370, and miR-575.
Three other miRNAs, miR-19b, miR-433, and miR-370 were associated with lymph node metastasis, decreased curvature, and poorly differentiated carcinoma.
A preliminary screening study suggested that down-regulation of miR-370 occurs in oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) tissue.
Squamous cell carcinoma tissues with perineural invasion had lowered miR-370 expression compared with contrasting OSCC.
Expression of four miRNAs (miR-30c, miR-30d, miR-30e-3p, miR-370) was significantly different between carcinomas and benign ovarian tissues as well as between carcinoma and borderline tissues.
Pruritus was assessed by the number of scratching bouts, whilst skin inflammation was evaluated by the extravascular accumulation of intravenously injected 125I-albumin (plasma extravasation) and myeloperoxidase (MPO) activity (neutrophil recruitment).
The neuropeptide PACAP and VPAC1 were previously found to negatively regulate megakaryopoiesis, and inhibition of their physiological pathway was found to have a thrombopoietic effect in conditions where megakaryopoiesis and thrombopoiesis were impaired, such as chemotherapy-induced thrombocytopenia and congenital thrombocytopenia.
The present study explored the thrombopoietic effect of VPAC1 inhibition in a murine model of syngeneic bone marrow transplantation (BMT) and in passive immune thrombocytopenia.
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an autoimmune disease which may lead to severe disabilities due to structural joint damage and extraarticular manifestations The dendritic cell marker CD83 belongs to the immunoglobulin superfamily and has previously been associated with autoimmune diseases.
Patients with PLCH displayed a normal expression of the maturity marker CD83 on BALF myeloid DCs.
To the differentiation-related markers, the BRAF/MAP2K1-mut LCH expressed CD14 but rarely expressed CD83 or CD86 (P &lt; .001).
On the contrary, BRAF/MAP2K1-wt LCH cells rarely expressed CD14 but expressed CD86, and some also expressed CD83 (P &lt; .001).
The protein phosphatase 1-like gene (PPM1l) was identified as causal gene for obesity and metabolic abnormalities in mice.
Three genes in this network, lipoprotein lipase (Lpl), lactamase beta (Lactb) and protein phosphatase 1-like (Ppm1l), are validated as previously unknown obesity genes, strengthening the association between this network and metabolic disease traits.
Based on previous research, we hypothesized that RES regulates FoxO1 transcriptional activity through the phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT signaling pathway to achieve an antioxidative effect on osteoporosis and then we confirmed this hypothesis in the present study.
FoxO1 is a major action target of RES to confer anti-osteoporosis function, and whose effect stems from its power to improve redox balance.
But whether FoxO1 is involved in the oxidative damage during osteoporosis is largely unknown.
In conclusion, our study revealed that the decline of FoxO1 is an important etiology factor of osteoporosis and unclosed a novel mechanism of FoxO1 regulation by TNF-Alfa.
In addition, several new PheWAS findings were identified including a cluster of association near the NDFIP1 gene for mental retardation (best SNP rs10057309, p = 4.33 x 10(-7), OR = 1.70, 95%CI = 1.38 - 2.09); association near PLCL1 gene for developmental delays and speech disorder [best SNP rs1595825, p = 1.13 x 10(-8), OR = 0.65(0.57 - 0.76)]; a cluster of associations in the IL5-IL13 region with Eosinophilic Esophagitis (EoE) [best at rs12653750, p = 3.03 x 10(-9), OR = 1.73 95%CI = (1.44 - 2.07)], previously implicated in asthma, allergy, and eosinophilia; and association of variants in GCKR and JAZF1 with allergic rhinitis in our pediatric cohorts [best SNP rs780093, p = 2.18 x 10(-5), OR = 1.39, 95%CI = (1.19 - 1.61)], previously demonstrated in metabolic disease and diabetes in adults.
177Lu-DOTATATE = lutetium octreotate; ACO = aconitase; Ad = adenine; AD = autosomal dominant; ATRX = ATRX chromatin remodeler; ccRCC = clear cell renal cell carcinoma; c-MYC = MYC proto oncognene; CoA = coenzyme A; COMT = catechol-O-methyl transferase; CPE = carboxypeptidase E; CS = citrate synthase; CT = computed tomography; DH = pyruvate dehydrogenase; DOTATATE = DOTA-octreotate; EGLN1/2 = egl-9 family hypoxia inducible factor 1/2; EGLN2/PHD1 = egl-9 family hypoxia inducible factor 2; elF-4E = eukaryotic initiation factor 4E; EMT = epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition; EPAS1/HIF2A = endothelial PAS domain protein 2/hypoxia-inducible factor 2Alfa; ERK = extracellular signal-regulated kinase; FH = fumarate hydroxylase; GSH = glutathione; H3F3A = histone 3.3 encoding gene; HIFs = Hypoxia-inducible factors; HIF-Alfa = hypoxia-inducible factor alpha; HNPGLs = head and neck paragangliomas; HRAS = HRas protooncogene; IDH = isocitrate dehydrogenase; IGF-1R = growth factor 1 receptor; KIF1B = kinesin family member 1B; MAX = myc-associated factor X; MDH2 = malate dehydrogenase; MN = metanephrine; MRI = magnetic resonance imaging; mTORC1 = mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1; MTY = methoxytyramine; NAd = nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide; NETs = neuroendocrine tumors; NF1 = neurofibromin 1; NMN = normetanephrine; OPLS-DA = orthogonal partial least square discriminant analysis; PFS = progression free survival; PHD = prolyl hydroxylase domain protein; PPGLs = Pheochromocytoma and Paragangliomas; PRRT = peptide receptor radionuclide therapy; Pvhl = von Hippel-Lindau protein; Raptor = regulatory associated protein of mTOR; RAS = rat sarcoma oncogene; RET = rearranged during transfection proto-oncogene; ROS = reactive oxygen species; S6K = S6 kinase; SDH = succinate dehydrogenase; SDHA, -B, -C, -D, = succinate dehydrogenase subunits A, B, C, D; SDHAF2 = succinate dehydrogenase complex assembly factor 2; SDHB, C, D = succinate dehydrogenase subunits B, C, D; SDHx = succinate dehydrogenase subunits; SSTRs = somatostatin receptors; SUCLG = succinyl-CoA synthase; TERRA = Telomeric Repeat-containing RNA; TET = ten-eleven-translocation methylcytosine dioxygenase; TMEM127 = transmembrane protein 127; VEGF = vascular endothelial growth factor; VHL = von Hippel-Lindau; Alfa-KGDH = alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase.
We report a case of MAX-associated renal cell carcinoma and confirm the role of TMEM127 mutations with renal cell carcinoma predisposition.
Alterations of von Hippel-Lindau (VHL), succinate dehydrogenase (SDHX), and TMEM127 have been associated with the development of pheochromocytomas (PCs) and paragangliomas (PGLs) and are also associated with the development of renal neoplasms.
Immunohistochemistry for SDHB and mutation analysis for TMEM127 was performed, in addition to analysis of The Cancer Genome Atlas datasets for SDHX and TMEM127 mutated renal cell carcinomas (RCCs).
The expanding etiology for hereditary pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas has recently included SDHA, TMEM127, MAX, and SDHAF2 as susceptibility genes.
This study analyzed the prospective, longitudinally followed up European-American-Asian Pheochromocytoma-Paraganglioma Registry for prevalence of SDHA, TMEM127, MAX, and SDHAF2 germline mutation carriers from 1993 to 2016.
Of 972 unrelated registrants without mutations in the classic pheochromocytoma- and paraganglioma-associated genes (632 female [65.0%] and 340 male [35.0%]; age range, 8-80; mean [SD] age, 41.0 [13.3] years), 58 (6.0%) carried germline mutations of interest, including 29 SDHA, 20 TMEM127, 8 MAX, and 1 SDHAF2.
Newly uncovered are 7 of 63 (11%) malignant pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas in SDHA and TMEM127 disease.
The SDHA, TMEM127, MAX, and SDHAF2 genes may contribute to hereditary pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma.
3-MT = 3-methoxytyramine; EPAS1 = endothelial pas domain protein 1; FH = fumarate hydratase; HIF2A = hypoxia inducible factor type 2A; MEN2 = multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2; NF1 = neurofibromatosis type 1; PNMT = phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase; PPGL = pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma; RET = rearranged during transfection; SDH = succinate dehydrogenase; SDHAF2 = succinate dehydrogenase complex assembly factor 2; TCA = tricarboxylic acid; TH = tyrosine hydroxylase; TMEM127 = transmembrane protein 127; VHL = von Hippel-Lindau.
This study assessed the effects of leukemia-related protein 16 (LRP16) on the regulation of pancreatic functions in mouse insulinoma (MIN6) cells.
Our recent studies have shown that a selective ABHD6 inhibitor WWL70 has anti-inflammatory and neuroprotective effects in animal models of traumatic brain injury and multiple sclerosis.
In this study, we investigated the role of targeting ABHD6 in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), an animal model of multiple sclerosis (MS).
Expression of clusterin correlates with tumor progression and therapeutic response in several human malignancies, including breast cancer.
The objective of this explorative study was to determine whether clusterin expression in breast cancer correlated with clinical pathologic characteristics and whether its expression was predictive of response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC).
We determined the clusterin expression pattern in 72 triple negative breast cancers (TNBC) treated with NAC before surgery.
Clusterin was present at higher levels in both fractions of patients with early and intermediate stages of breast cancer.
Discovery and development of a novel anticancer PEG-SMR-Clu peptide to prevent breast cancer metastasis.
PEG-SMRwt-Clu and PEG-SMRwt peptides inhibited the growth of both of MCF-7 (estrogen responsive, ER+) and MDA-MD-231 (estrogen non-responsive, ER-) human breast cancer cells in a dose and time-dependent manner, without inducing cytotoxic effects.
PEG-SMRwt-CLU peptides inhibited the growth of human breast cancer cells and blocked tumor exosome release in vitro.
Clinically, breast cancer patients possess sCLU expression only in mature CD68(+) macrophages but not in immature CD33(+) immunosuppressive myeloid cells infiltrating the tumors.
Immunoblotting and MRM-based validation in a separate cohort testified a panel of 21 proteins such as zinc-alpha2-glycoprotein, A2GL, retinol-binding protein 4, annexin A1, SAP3, SRC8, gelsolin, kininogen 1, CO9, clusterin, ceruloplasmin, and Alfa1-antitrypsin could be a panel of candidate markers that could discriminate HE breast cancer from healthy controls.
Exportin 4 (XPO4) is a novel identified candidate tumour-suppressor gene involved in the pathogenesis of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
To evaluate potential biomarkers in HCC, we employed multiple methods in this study, including qPCR, immunostaining methods and tissue microarrays (TMAs), as well as histological and pathological analysis, to assess TGFBeta, XPO4, elF5A2 and ANGPTL4 in cancerous and paracancerous liver tissues from 280 patients suffering from liver cancer.
XPO4 in cancerous liver tissue and TGFBeta1 in paracancerous liver tissue were positively correlated with tumor differentiation.
Additionally, higher levels of XPO4 in cancerous liver tissue suggested that the patient would have a better prognosis and survival rate.
However, higher production of XPO4 in paracancerous liver tissue suggested a worse prognosis.
All the results above provide new insights into better understanding biological indicators, such as XPO4, TGFBeta1, ANGPTL4 and elF5A2, in the prediction and evaluation of liver cancer, as well as signaling pathways in the control of liver cancer.
XPO4 and TGFBeta1 may serve as useful markers to evaluate the size and prognosis of liver cancer.
Exportin 4 (XPO4) is a recently-discovered candidate tumor-suppressor gene identified in a liver cancer mouse model.
To investigate the role of XPO4 in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) pathogenesis, we determined XPO4 expression and its correlation to prognosis in human primary HCC.
One gene, XPO4, encodes a nuclear export protein whose substrate, EIF5A2, is amplified in human tumors, is required for proliferation of XPO4-deficient tumor cells, and promotes hepatocellular carcinoma in mice.
In a population of 159 patients on renal replacement therapy (RDT) we performed a 1-yr prospective observational study, with common parameters to indicate cardiovascular pathologies (PAS, LVMI), calcium-phosphorous metabolism (Ca, PO 4 , Ca x PO 4 ), dialytic adequacy (Kt/V, URR%), nutritional status (nPCR, Alb, K), and anemia (hemoglobin (Hb)).
Based on serial mortality rates for the general population of England and Wales, significantly increased mortality was shown for cancers of the pharynx (observed (Obs) 4, expected (Exp) 0.7, standardised mortality ratio (SMR) 559, p&lt;0.05), non-malignant diseases of the respiratory system (Obs 61, Exp 43.0, SMR 142, p&lt;0.05), and non-malignant diseases of the genitourinary system (Obs 10, Exp 4.1, SMR 243, p&lt;0.05).
Non-significantly increased SMRs were shown for lung cancer (Obs 45, Exp 40.7, SMR 111) and cancer of the prostate (Obs 9, Exp 7.5, SMR 116).
In this largest-ever GWAS meta-analysis for nicotine dependence and the largest-ever cross-ancestry GWAS meta-analysis for any smoking phenotype, we reconfirmed the well-known CHRNA5-CHRNA3-CHRNB4 genes and further yielded a novel association in the DNA methyltransferase gene DNMT3B.
The relationship of HTR4 (rs3995090), HTR2A (rs6313), GRIK5 (rs8099939), GRIN2B (rs2268132), and CHRNB4 (rs1948) gene polymorphisms and COPD, as well as the contribution of these polymorphisms to the variations in quantitative characteristics that describe respiratory function, smoking behavior, and nicotine dependence was assessed in an ethnically homogeneous Tatar population.
Genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have identified associations between the CHRNA5-CHRNA3-CHRNB4 gene cluster and smoking heaviness and nicotine dependence.
Polymorphisms in the CHRNA5-CHRNA3-CHRNB4 gene cluster (Chr15q25) have been robustly associated with nicotine dependence, including genome-wide studies, as well as with cognitive and neuropsychological measures.
Here, we evaluated the effect of polymorphisms in CHRNA5-CHRNA3-CHRNB4 gene cluster and their interaction with tobacco smoking status on cognition in patients with Attention Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD).
Eight SNPs from the CHRNA5-CHRNA3-CHRNB4 gene cluster were evaluated on a clinical sample of 403 adults with ADHD.
The associations between CHRNA5-CHRNA3-CHRNB4 variants and cigarettes per day (CPD), the Fagerstroem Test for Nicotine Dependence (FTND), and craving were analyzed in data from 662 lifetime smokers from an Israeli adult Jewish household sample.
We found a significant increase in levels of adhesion molecules (VCAM-1) and selectins (E-selectin) in parallel with increased severity of diabetic retinopathy, with a significant difference of inflammatory markers between stages of retinopathy.
Our aim was to investigate the role of soluble E-selectin in the formation of diabetic retinopathy.
An elevated E-selectin level can play a role in the development of diabetic retinopathy, but it does not seem to alter disease severity.
However, glycemic control and the reduction of cardiovascular risk factors may also alter the level of E-selectin that might play a role in the prevention of diabetic retinopathy.
To evaluate efficacy of the treatment, the progression of the disease (number of laser treatments, number of bevacizumab treatments, and incidence of retinal detachment) was evaluated by serial ophthalmologic examinations, and plasma soluble E-selectin levels were measured weekly.
After adjusting for age, glycemic control, and other potential confounders, baseline plasma levels of E-selectin were associated significantly with progression of DR, E-selectin and tumor necrosis factor-Alfa (TNF-Alfa) levels with incidence of proliferative DR (PDR), and soluble intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (sICAM-1) and TNF-Alfa levels with incidence of macular edema (ME).
The 6-HT was administrated by perfusion and ejection in "brain slices" of hippocampus, inducing epileptic activity after its administration; the toxin was not able to block the epileptogenic crisis observed in the chronic model of the epilepsy, suggesting that 6-HT did not block the overactive GluRs responsible for this epileptic activity.
In patients with systemic sclerosis (SSc), the relationship between innate immune activation, represented by increased expression of interferon (IFN)-regulated genes, and vascular injury/activation, manifest by increased endothelin-1 (ET-1), endothelin converting enzyme-1 (ECE1) and intercellular adhesion molecule-1, is uncertain.
Recent findings indicate that the level of SR-BI expression correlate with aggressiveness and poor survival in breast and prostate cancer.
Furthermore, we performed immunohistochemistry analysis on human primary prostate cancer tissue sections derived from patients to investigate the correlation of SR-BI with clinicopathological parameters and the mTOR target pS6.
In contrast to LDLR, we identified SR-BI mRNA and protein expression to be induced in high Gleason grade primary prostate cancers.
We identified SR-BI to indicate human prostate cancer formation, suggesting that increased levels of SR-BI may be involved in the generation of a castration-resistant phenotype.
Silencing of SR-BI may impact the ability of prostate cancer cells, particularly those of castration-resistant state, to maintain the intracellular supply of androgens by removing a supply of cholesterol.
The down-regulation of SR-BI significantly impacts PSA production of prostate cancer cells, as well as the viability of C4-2 cells in the presence and absence of HDL.
This may indicate a deficiency in cholesterol availability to the androgen synthesis pathway or may implicate a role for SR-BI in prostate cancer signal transduction pathways.
play roles in preterm labor and preterm premature rupture of membranes (pPROM); 3) integrated aspects of maternal and fetal host responses (inflammation, altered immune adaptations, endocrine and paracrine mechanisms) play increasingly understood roles in premature activation of parturition; and 4) identification and systemic treatment of common genitourinary infections, most importantly bacterial vaginosis (BV), reduce the risks of preterm delivery and PROM.
Univariate analysis showed the following to be significant predictors of PPROM at &lt; 35 weeks: a past history of PTD between 25 and 30 weeks (P &lt; 0.008), cerclage in the current pregnancy (P &lt; 0.0001), bacterial vaginosis (P &lt; 0.011), CL &lt; 25 mm (P &lt; 0.0001) and CF &gt; 25% (P &lt; 0.0001).
In this study, localization of gelatinase activities in six cases of glioblastoma, two cases of anaplastic astrocytoma, and six cases of low-grade astrocytomas was investigated by film in situ zymography (FIZ).
In situ hybridization of the null cell line HLN-STL-C established from an adult T-cell leukemia patient showed that 100% of the cells contained both EBERs and LMP1 mRNA and about 0.1% of the cells contained gp350/220 mRNA, indicating that a few of the null cells which carried the EBV genome spontaneously entered the late EBV replication cycle.
IQ and CELF-3 performance were highly interrelated regardless of whether subjects had autism or were controls.
Both IQ and CELF-3 ability were positively correlated with STG in controls, but a different pattern was observed in subjects with autism.
In controls, left STG gray matter was significantly (r = .42, p &lt; or = .05) related to receptive language on the CELF-3; in contrast, a zero order correlation was found with autism.
Here, we showed that DUSP10 knockout (KO) mice had increased intestinal epithelial cell (IEC) proliferation and migration and developed less severe colitis than wild-type (WT) mice in response to dextran sodium sulphate (DSS) treatment, which is associated with increased ERK1/2 activation and Kruppel-like factor 5 (KLF5) expression in IEC.
Models of painful small-fiber sensory neuropathy were developed and several laboratories have progressed in the conception of TRPV1 agonists and antagonists.
TRPV1 is involved in oxidant stress-induced pain and in neuronal injury, contributing to diabetic sensory neuropathy.
Despite the impediments posed by phenotypic and genetic heterogeneity among women with PCOS, investigation into one locus, the DENND1A gene, is providing insight into the ovarian steroidogenesis.
We conducted a meta-analysis to evaluate the rs10818854, rs2479106, and rs10986105 polymorphism in DENND1A gene with PCOS susceptibility.
In conclusion, the DENND1A gene variant is likely to have influence on PCOS risk.
PCOS has a strong genetic component, and genome-wide association studies have identified several candidate genes, notably DENND1A, which encodes connecdenn 1, involved in trafficking of endosomes.
Furthermore, overexpression of DENND1A variant 2 in normal theca cells resulted in a PCOS phenotype with increased androgen production.
In addition, GWAS have suggested that DENND1A, epidermal growth factor signaling, and DNA repair pathways play a role in PCOS pathogenesis.
The rs2479106 and rs10818854 polymorphisms in the DENND1A gene have been reported to be extensively associated with risk of polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS).
Overall, significant increase of PCOS risk was found between DENND1A-rs10818854 and PCOS susceptibility.
This meta-analysis suggested that rs2479106 and rs10818854 polymorphisms in the DENND1A gene were associated with increased risk of PCOS.
Variant 2 of the DENND1A gene was found overexpressed in PCOS theca cells and confirmed to enhance androgen production.
Our previous research had identified three susceptibility loci (rs2479106, DENND1A; rs13405728, LHCGR; rs13429458, THADA) for PCOS in Han Chinese women.
Three of the eleven variants associated with PCOS in the Han Chinese genome-wide association studies were also associated with PCOS in at least one European population when corrected for multiple testing (DENND1A, THADA and YAP1).
MicroRNA-106a-5p (MiR-106a-5p), a small non-coding RNA, has been reported to be downregulated in astrocytoma, osteosarcoma and colorectal cancer.
The study aimed to evaluate the effects of miR-106a on prostate cancer cells and the underlying molecular mechanism.
MiR-106a as an oncogene could promote proliferation and metastasis of prostate cancer cells by directly targeting PTEN in vivo and in vitro.
CXCL1 secreted by hAdSCs downregulated miR-106a expression in triple negative breast cancer, and resulted in ABCG2 upregulation and doxorubicin resistance.
Our findings suggest that CXCL1 secreted by hAdSCs elicits doxorubicin resistance through miR-106a-mediated ABCG2 upregulation in triple negative breast cancer.
Previous studies have revealed that miR-106a is abnormally expressed in various cancers.
Copy number gains in SOX2 in the region of 3q26-28 occur in 94% of SQCCs, and appear to act both early and late in disease progression by stabilizing the initial squamous injury response in stem cells and promoting growth of invasive carcinoma.
A key feature of high-grade serous ovarian carcinoma (HGSOC) is frequent amplification of the 3q26 locus harboring PRKC-l (PRKCI).
Four loci, 5p15.33 (TERT), 6p21.3 (BTNL2), 3q28 (TP63) and 17q24.2 (BPTF), previously shown to be strongly associated with overall lung adenocarcinoma risk in East Asians, were re-discovered as loci associated with a higher susceptibility to EGFR mutation-positive lung adenocarcinoma.
Chromosome 3q26-28 is a critical region of genomic amplification in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), particularly lung squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs).
The PIK3CA gene at chromosome 3q26.32 was found to be amplified in up to 45% of patients with squamous cell carcinoma of the lung.
Aspirin/NSAID interacted with MAP3K7 (colon cancer) and with MAPK14, NFAT5, and TRAF2 (rectal cancer); smoking cigarettes interacted with NFAM1 and NFAT2 (colon cancer) and MAPK8, NFAT5, and TNFRSF1A (rectal cancer); BMI interacted with NFAM1 and NFAT5 (colon cancer) and with MAPK8 and TNFRSF1A (rectal cancer).
Previously, we have cloned the cDNAs for the meningioma expressed antigen 6 (MGEA6) and its splice variant MGEA11.
Here, we show that antibodies against recombinantly expressed MGEA6/11 are found in 41.7% (10/24) of the sera from meningioma patients and in 2/8 sera of glioblastoma patients, whereas no response was seen in 12 sera from healthy persons.
The immune response to MGEA6/11 is frequent in both meningioma and glioma patients and may likely be attributed to overexpression of the MGEA6/11 protein in the tumor cells.
The meningioma expressed antigen-6 (MGEA6) was originally identified as an immunogenic antigen in meningioma patients.
The clones were sequenced, and sequence comparison revealed that the seven clones represent five different genes, providing evidence that meningiomas express a spectrum of immunoreactive antigens, which were termed meningioma expressed antigens (MGEAs).
These data suggest that the newly identified MGEA genes may be useful for diagnosis and possibly therapy of meningioma.
The longest open reading frame was found to be 2412 bp encoding an immunoreactive antigen termed meningioma expressed antigen 6 (MEA6).
Using the keywords [St John's Wort OR Hypericum perforatum OR hypericin OR hyperforin OR johanniskraut OR] AND [depression OR antidepressant OR SSRI], a preliminary search (without language restriction) on the PubMed, Ovid, Clinical Trials Register of the Cochrane Collaboration Depression, Anxiety and Neurosis Group, Cochrane Field for Complementary Medicine, China National Knowledge Infrastructure and WanFang database yielded 5428 papers between 1-Jan-1960 and 1-May-2016.
There is evidence to suggest that caregivers of patients with head and neck cancer (HNC) are susceptible to post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) symptoms.
Evidence suggests that patients with head and neck cancer (HNC) are susceptible to post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).
Among distressed HNC survivors, higher PTG was associated with lower tumor stage, absence of an anxiety disorder, absence of an alcohol use disorder, and better social functioning.
Although lysyl oxidase-like 1 (LOXL1) is known as the principal genetic risk factor for pseudoexfoliation (PEX) syndrome, a major cause of glaucoma and cardiovascular complications, no functional variants have been identified to date.
Recent studies have shed new light on the genetic factors underlying pseudoexfoliation syndrome, growing our understanding of the role of the lysyl oxidase-like 1 (LOXL1) gene and its various polymorphisms as well as identifying new genetic associations.
We found that TAPP2, syntrophin, and utrophin are coexpressed in normal human B cells and B-chronic lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL) cells.
CREB1 expression, which was activated by E2F, was coupled with RFC3 expression during the G1/S progression in the KG-1 acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cell line.
The National Reference Center for equine infectious anemia (EIA) validated a commercial ELISA (Eradikit(R) EIAV Indirect ELISA, In3diagnostic(R), Turin, Italy) employing a chimeric recombinant gag and env peptide for the detection of EIA virus antibodies, following the guidelines of the World Organization for Animal Health.
The development of anaemia in feline leukaemia virus (FeLV)-infected cats is associated with the emergence of a novel viral subgroup, FeLV-C. FeLV-C arises from the subgroup that is transmitted, FeLV-A, through alterations in the amino acid sequence of the receptor binding domain (RBD) of the envelope glycoprotein that result in a shift in the receptor usage and the cell tropism of the virus.
These results suggest that the interaction between sf-Stk and the envelope proteins of the polycythemia- and anemia-inducing variants of SFFV is architecturally different.
We conclude that the common clinical features of patients with an isolated mutation of ZRSR2 are a macrocytic anemia without leukopenia, thrombocytopenia or an increase in marrow blast percentage.
Recent studies have shown that recombinant human thrombomodulin (rhTM) improves exacerbation and clinical outcome of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, but the mechanism remains unknown.
This furthers our understanding of the regulatory mechanism of cardiac sarcomere assembly in both physiologic and pathologic contexts, and uncovers a potential novel pathway to cardiomyopathy through modulating the Stk38/Rbm24 protein activity.
This study uncovers a potential novel pathway to cardiomyopathy through down-regulation of the RBP Rbm24.
Nsp3 proteins of Semliki Forest (SFV), Sindbis (SINV), and Chikungunya viruses all showed avid and SH3-dependent binding to amphiphysins.
Colitis severity was assessed by body weight, colonoscopy, colon length, histological score, cytokine mRNA expression, and myeloperoxidase (MPO) activity.
Pigmentary hypertrichosis and non-autoimmune insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (PHID) is associated with recessive mutations in SLC29A3, encoding the equilibrative nucleoside transporter hENT3 expressed in mitochondria, causing PHID and H syndromes, familial Rosai-Dorfman disease, and histiocytosis-lymphadenopathy-plus syndrome.
The patients share many of the characteristics previously reported with H syndrome, including hyperpigmentation, hypertrichosis, short stature, insulin-dependent diabetes, arthritis and systemic inflammation, as well as some novel features, including selective IgG subclass deficiency and autoimmune hepatitis.
Loss of function recessive mutations in the SLC29A3 gene that encodes human equilibrative nucleoside transporter 3 (ENT3) have been identified in patients with pigmented hypertrichotic dermatosis with insulin-dependent diabetes (PHID).
Thus, apoptotic loss of islet Beta-cells may contribute to the occurrence of autoantibody-negative insulin-dependent diabetes in individuals with non-functional ENT3 mutations.
H syndrome and pigmented hypertrichosis with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (PHID) had been described as two autosomal recessive disorders.
The term H syndrome was coined to denote the major clinical findings which include hyperpigmentation, hypertrichosis, hearing loss, hepatosplenomegaly, hypogonadism, hyperglycemia/diabetes mellitus and hallux valgus/flexion contractures.
Mutations in SLC29A3 lead to pigmentary hypertrichosis and non-autoimmune insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (PHID) and H syndromes, familial Rosai-Dorfman disease, and histiocytosis-lymphadenopathy plus syndrome.
This report describes an insulin-dependent diabetes patient with a syndromic presentation in whom a homozygous SLC29A3 mutation was identified.
These clinical features overlapped with pigmented hypertrichosis with insulin-dependent diabetes (PHID), H syndrome, Faisalabad histiocytosis and sinus histiocytosis with massive lymphadenopathy (SHML), all of which are also caused by SLC29A3 mutations.
Germline mutations in the SLC29A3 gene result in a range of recessive, clinically related syndromes: H syndrome, pigmented hypertrichosis with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus syndrome, Faisalabad histiocytosis, and sinus histiocytosis with massive lymphadenopathy.
Characteristic ADC map features were identified for protrusion, extrusion and sequester types of lumbar disk herniations, spondylolisthesis, reactive Modic endplate changes, Pfirrmann grades of IVD degeneration, and compromised spinal nerves.
We measured T2 relaxation time of the intervertebral discs (IVD) and facet joints (FJ) in patients with degenerative spondylolisthesis (DS) and no spondylolisthesis (NS) and investigated the characteristics of these parts in DS.
Early stages of scoliosis and spondylolisthesis entail changes in the intervertebral disc (IVD) structure and biochemistry.
Therefore, this study aims to develop the AMRSID (analysis of MR signal intensity distribution) method to analyze the 3D distribution of the MR signal intensity within the IVD and to evaluate their sensitivity to scoliosis and spondylolisthesis and their severities.
IVDs were collected from patients with lumbar fracture, vertebral tumor, disc herniation or spondylolisthesis.
"Pedra hume caa" is the common name of five species of Myrcia genus used as traditional medicine for the treatment of diabetes mellitus.
Some of the species are used in folk medicine, such as a group known as "pedra-hume-caa" or "pedra-ume-caa" or "insulina vegetal" (insulin plant) that it is used for the treatment of diabetes.
Some of the species are used in folk medicine, such as a group known as "pedra-hume-caa" or "pedra-ume-caa" or "insulina vegetal" (insulin plant) that it is used for the treatment of diabetes.
Some of the species are used in folk medicine, such as a group known as "pedra-hume-caa" or "pedra-ume-caa" or "insulina vegetal" (insulin plant) that it is used for the treatment of diabetes.
Adult Tshz1(+/-) mice display glucose intolerance due to defects in glucose-stimulated insulin secretion associated with reduced Pdx1 and Clec16a expression in Tshz1(+/-) islets.
Lastly, we demonstrate that TSHZ1 levels are reduced in human islets of donors with type 2 diabetes.
Thus, we position Tshz1 in the transcriptional network of maturing Beta-cells and suggest that its dysregulation could contribute to the islet phenotype of human type 2 diabetes.
Material e Metodos: Revisao bibliografica, atraves da Medline e PubMed, utilizando como palavras-chave: 'borderline personality disorder', 'cognitive-behavioral therapy', 'efficacy'.
### #################(obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea syndrome, OSAHS)########(resistant hypertension, RH)###, OSAHS############ ### 80#OSAHS##RH##[##3######(#####)##, ##################(140/90 mmHg, 1 mmHg=0.133 kPa)]############, ######6#################, ###########(apnea hypopnea index, AHI)########(SaO(2))###########, ################ ### ###, AHI#(32.9+/-10.8)#/h(x+/-s, ##)##(9.4+/-6.5)#/h, ##SaO(2)#(0.682+/-0.062)##(0.884+/-0.056), #########(t####18.863#26.614, P##&lt;0.001)#######(150.5+/-9.8) mmHg##(140.7+/-6.8) mmHg, ####(97.8+/-7.3) mmHg##(88.6+/-6.3) mmHg#######(154.3+/-8.9) mmHg##(144.8+/-5.8) mmHg, ####(100.6+/-7.4) mmHg##(91.3+/-5.5) mmHg#######(145.5+/-8.8) mmHg##(135.8+/-5.7) mmHg, ####(93.8+/-6.4) mmHg##(84.6+/-5.9) mmHg, #########(t####7.832#6.903#7.005#6.848#8.025#7.554, P##&lt;0.001)##########(11.5+/-2.2)mmHg########(10.2+/-3.1)mmHg, #########(9.0+/-2.8)mmHg########(7.9+/-3.5)mmHg, #################, #########(t####9.732#6.936, P##&lt;0.001)########&lt;10%##########75.0%######37.5%, ########(X(2)=22.857, P&lt;0.01), ###############45##############, #####(3.2+/-0.4)#######(2.6+/-0.5)#, ########(t=9.276, P&lt;0.01)# ### OSAHS##RH###, ##OSAHS###########, ########, ##########.
In case of coronary atherosclerosis the organism reaction to expressed CMC is manifested basically by intensified synthesis of cathodic complement-C3-similar autoprecipitin, but in case of endocarditis--by consumption of one with formation of anodic autoprecipitin and by intensified synthesis of autoprecipitating immunoglobulin G. These membranotropic autoimmune reactions are identical with the organism reactions to alien (heterologous) agents and differentially participate in development both of basic disease and perioperational complications after cardiac operations using trans- and implants, hence, they should be taken into account during membrane-stabilising and immunocorrecting therapy of recipients.
In cultured rat hepatoma (H4IIE) cells, TNF-Alfa significantly increased hemopexin mRNA accumulation.
This analytical method was applied to an in vitro diagnostic multivariate index assay where a panel of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) biomarkers comprising alpha-fetoprotein, hemopexin, and alpha-2-macroglobulin (A2M) was examined in terms of the serum level and their fuco-fractions.
The aim of this study was to identify new target genes for microRNA polymorphisms (miR-146aC&gt;G and miR-196a2T&gt;C) in primary ovarian insufficiency (POI).
In addition, several specific miRNAs (miR-23a, miR-27a, miR-22-3p, miR-146a, miR-196a, miR-290-295, miR-423, and miR-608) related to POI are also examined in order to highlight the issues that deserve further investigation.
(2) Expand sample size to 14 cases for endometriosis group and 16 cases for control group.Reverse transcription (RT)-PCR technique was utilized to detect the expression of miR- 142- 5p, miR- 146a- 5p and miR- 543 in endometrial tissues, and verify miRNA microarray results.
(1) miRNA and mRNA microarray screening results showed that, among the endometrial tissues of patients with endometriosis infertility and with implantation window phase, 6 differentially expressed miRNA were indentified, among which miR-142-5p, miR-146a-5p, miR-1281, miR-940, miR-4634 showed significantly enhanced expression and miR- 543 showed significantly inhibited expression.
(2) RT- PCR test showed that the average levels of expression of miR-142-5p and miR-146a-5p in implantation window phase endometrium in endometriosis group were 8.3+/-10.6 and 1.9+/-0.8 respectively; the average levels of that in control group were 1.1+/-0.6 and 0.9+/-0.4, respectively.
There are multiple differential expressions of miRNA in the implantation window phase endometrium tissues of endometriosis infertility patients, among which miR-142-5p and miR-146a-5p show significantly enhanced expression and may affect embryo implantation by acting on a variety of endometrial receptivity marker molecules.
We also analyze the ezrin-meditated regulation of critical pathways associated with asthma, such as the RhoA, Rho-associated protein kinase (ROCK), and protein kinase A (cAMP/PKA) pathways.
Pneumothorax is a well-recognized complication of central venous line insertion (CVL).
We identify and replicate an association between the constituents of the apical plasma membrane and CF lung disease (p = 0.0099 and p = 0.0180, respectively) and highlight a role for the SLC9A3-SLC9A3R1/2-EZR complex in contributing to CF lung disease.
The BrGR-expressing yeast strain induced the activation of metabolic enzymes (Hxt, G6PDH, GAPDH and Ald), antioxidant systems (Gpx, Trx2, Trx3, Trr1, Tsa1 and porin) and molecular chaperones (Hsp104, Hsp90, Hsp70, Hsp42, Hsp26, Grp, Sti1 and Zpr1), which led to lower oxidative protein damage after a reduction in the level of cellular ROS in the BrGR-expressing yeast strain exposed to H(2)O(2) than in the wild-type yeast strain.
In this review, we focus on the use of these agents in children to treat inflammatory skin diseases other than psoriasis, including atopic dermatitis, hidradenitis suppurativa, pemphigus vulgaris, bullous pemphigoid, and toxic epidermal necrolysis, with an emphasis on the use of etanercept, infliximab, rituximab, omalizumab, and ustekinumab.
The addition of distamycin A enhanced the double-strand DNA cleavage at the 5'-CCT-3'/3'-GGA-5' and 5'-CCA-3'/3'-GGT-5' sequences, with a two-nucleotide 3'-stagger of the cleaved residues.
Besides, we screened for all the known genes related to axonal autosomal recessive Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT2A2/HMSN2A2/MFN2, CMT2B1/LMNA, CMT2B2/MED25, CMT2B5/NEFL, ARCMT2F/dHMN2B/HSPB1, CMT2K/GDAP1, CMT2P/LRSAM1, CMT2R/TRIM2, CMT2S/IGHMBP2, CMT2T/HSJ1, CMTRID/COX6A1, ARAN-NM/HINT and GAN/GAN), for the genes related to autosomal recessive hereditary spastic paraplegia with thin corpus callosum and axonal peripheral neuropathy (SPG7/PGN, SPG15/ZFYVE26, SPG21/ACP33, SPG35/FA2H, SPG46/GBA2, SPG55/C12orf65 and SPG56/CYP2U1), as well as for the causative gene of peripheral neuropathy with or without agenesis of the corpus callosum (SLC12A6).
Plasmacytomas often present as a collection of findings known as POEMS-syndrome (Polyneuropathy, Organomegaly, Endocrinopathy, M-Protein spike, and Skin changes).
POEMS (acronym for polyneuropathy, organomegaly, endocrinopathy, M protein myeloma and skin changes), is a rare disease which occurs in the setting of plasma cell dyscrasias.
Previous case reports and studies have shown that anti-myelin-associated glycoprotein (MAG) antibody can be detected in patients with polyneuropathy without any detectable M-protein.
Polyneuropathy, Organomegaly, Endocrinopathy, M protein and Skin changes (POEMS) syndrome is rare plasma cell dyscrasia with multisystem involvement.
The name comes from the five characteristic features: Polyneuropathy, organomegaly, endocrinopathy, M protein and skin changes.
Polyneuropathy, organomegaly, endocrinopathy, M-protein, and skin changes (POEMS) syndrome and monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS) are paraproteinemic disorders that can cause demyelinating polyneuropathy.
Polyneuropathy, organomegaly, endocrinopathy, M protein, and skin changes (POEMS) syndrome, a form of osteosclerotic myeloma, is a multisystem disease related to a monoclonal plasma cell proliferative disorder.
She had been treated with cyclophosphamide, melphalan, lenalidomide and corticosteroids for POEMS syndrome (polyneuropathy, organomegaly, endocrinopathy or edema, M protein, skin changes).
Polyneuropathy, organomegaly, endocrinopathy, M-protein, and skin changes (POEMS) syndrome is a rare cause of demyelinating neuropathy, with multi-organ involvement characterised by plasma cell dyscrasia and VEGF overproduction.
As a consequence, leukemia induction and leukemia maintenance were severely impaired in Inca1-/- bone marrow cells.
The re-initiation of leukemia was also significantly inhibited in absence of Inca1-/- in MLL-AF9- and c-myc/BCL2-positive leukemia mouse models.
These findings indicate distinct functional properties of Inca1 in normal hematopoietic cells compared to leukemia initiating cells.
This preliminary study indicated the tumor suppressing roles of miR-372 in cell cycle progression of TW01 cells, possibly via the down-regulation of CDK2 and CCNA1 as well as the up-regulation of CDKN1A and INCA1.Key Words: apoptosis, microRNA, nasopharyngeal carcinoma, miR-372, CDK2, CCNA1.
Furthermore, blasts from acute lymphoid leukemia and acute myeloid leukemia patients expressed significantly reduced INCA1 levels highlighting its relevance for growth control in vivo.
Our objectives were (i) to assess the current prevalence of childhood overweight (including obesity) (OWOB) in France and its relationship with comprehensive socioeconomic status (SES) indicators and (ii) to examine trends in OWOB prevalence and changes in energy intake (EI) and sedentary behavior (SED) based on the previous INCA 1 (Individuelle Nationale des Consommations Alimentaires) data (1998-1999).
Both estradiol and global ischemia markedly increased ERalpha, but not ERbeta, protein in CA1.
It has been reported that BMPR2 is associated with chondrosarcoma.
Moreover, the detection of BMPR2 is more frequent in dedifferentiated chondrosarcomas (DDCS) than in conventional chondrosarcomas (CCS).
BMPR2, phospho-SMAD1/5 (pSMAD1/5), and runt-related transcription factor 2 (RUNX2) expressions were found to be associated with the pathological grades of chondrosarcoma and could be a promising target of treatment outcome.
It has been demonstrated that more prevalent expression of bone morphogenetic protein receptor 2 (BMPR2) has been detected in dedifferentiated chondrosarcomas than conventional chondrosarcomas.
Here, we find that BMPR2 inhibition induces apoptosis and autophagy of chondrosarcoma.
We found that BMPR2 expression was correlated with the clinicopathological features of chondrosarcomas, and could predict the treatment outcome.
Knockdown of BMPR2 by small interfering RNA results in growth inhibition in chondrosarcoma cells.
Silencing BMPR2 promoted G2/M cell cycle arrest, induced chondrosarcoma cell apoptosis through caspase-3-dependent pathway via repression of X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein (XIAP) and induced autophagy of chondrosarcoma cells via XIAP-Mdm2-p53 pathway.
Inhibition of autophagy induced by BMPR2 small interfering RNA (siBMPR2) sensitized chondrosarcoma cells to siBMPR2-induced apoptotic cell death, suggesting that autophagy has a protective role for chondrosarcoma cells in context of siBMPR2-induced apoptotic cell death.
Taken together, our results suggest that BMPR2 has a significant role in the tumorigenesis of chondrosarcoma, and could be an important prognostic marker for chondrosarcoma.
BMPR2 inhibition could eventually provide a promising therapy for chondrosarcoma treatment.
The role of Beta-defensin-1 in asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) remains unclear.
In Japanese and Chinese populations, two different beta-defensin-1 polymorphisms have been associated with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease phenotypes.
The autosomal recessive ataxias are separated into Friedreich ataxia, ataxia due to vitamin E deficiency, ataxia due to Abeta-lipoproteinemia, Refsum disease, late-onset Tay-Sachs disease, cerebrotendineous xanthomatosis, spinocerebellar ataxia with axonal neuropathy, ataxia telangiectasia, ataxia telangiectasia-like disorder, ataxia with oculomotor apraxia 1 and 2, spastic ataxia of Charlevoix-Saguenay, Cayman ataxia, Marinesco-Sjoegren syndrome, and autosomal recessive mitochondrial ataxias (AR-CPEO, SANDO, SCAE, AHS, IOSCA, MEMSA, LBSL CoQ-deficiency, PDC-deficiency).
Only patients presenting PEO as part of their clinical phenotype had POLG mutations, in seven of them together with myopathic signs and in one with a sensori-motor peripheral neuropathy.
Moreover, it is suggested that blockades of 5-HT3 and 5-HT4 receptors are not relevant to the control of motion sickness; and furthermore, it suggested that blocking 5-HT4 receptors in addition to 5-HT3 receptors does not have an additional effect on the control of cisplatin-induced emesis, but that 5-HT4 receptors are at least partly involved in the mechanism of emesis induced by copper sulfate.
Therefore, we used Biolog GN2 microplates to analyze the ability of 103 clinical, predominantly diarrheal, isolates of Aeromonas to use various carbon sources, and we verified whether, among the substrates metabolized by these strains, there were some endogenous to the human intestine.
RP30 was one of these strains that was randomly selected and analysed by using a morphological, physiological and biochemical plate, Biolog GN2 Microplate System and API 20E system.
Histological and clinical diagnoses of the 14 patients were as follows: IgA nephropathy 3, non-IgA GN 2, and asymptomatic significant microscopic hematuria [more than 100 red blood cells per high-power field (x400)] with or without proteinuria 9.
The incidence of membranous form of glomerulonephritis was high (34 out of 44 kidney biopsy cases, 77%), the rest of patients showing mesangiocapillary GN-8 (18%) and mesangial proliferative GN-2 (5%).
In organ cultures, nephrosis-producing IBV strains (GN-2 and M-41) were slightly more ciliostatic and respiratory strains (Beaudette and Kita-1/Tokushima) less ciliostatic at 40.5 degrees C than at 37 degrees C. Mortality of chicken embryos infected with the GN-2, M-41 and Kita-1/Tokushima strains was greater at 40.5 degrees C than at 37 degrees C, while the reverse was true of the Beaudette strain which caused no embryo mortality at 40.5 degrees C. The Beaudette strain of IBV was the only one which could not be recovered from the kidneys of young chickens four days after infection.
In addition, in Alzheimer's disease we found simple gangliosides (GN2, GM3) to be elevated in the frontal and parietal cortex, which might correlate accelerated lysosomal degradation of gangliosides and/or astrogliosis occurring during neuronal death.
The aim of this study was to investigate the immunoreactivity to tryptase and to cathepsin-G of MC from human cutaneous mastocytosis and to compare their number in normal skin and cutaneous mastocytosis.
Morphometric evaluation of MC number demostrated that the number of both tryptase- and cathepsin-G-positive MC was significantly higher in cutaneous mastocytosis as compared to normal skin and that in both conditions the number of tryptase-positive MC was significantly higher as compared to the number of cathepsin-G-positive MC.
In conclusion, in this study, for the first time we have demonstrated the presence of MC with immunoreactivity to cathepsin-G in human cutaneous mastocytosis, as well as the co-localization of tryptase and cathepsin-G in MC secretory granules.
The aim of our retrospective study was to evaluate the association of miR-126-3p, miR-126-5p and miR-664-3p tumour expression levels with outcomes of patients with metastatic colorectal cancer treated with bevacizumab.
In the present study, we investigated the role of miR-126-5p and Bcl2l2 in cervical cancer cells.
First, miR-126-5p expression was aberrantly downregulated in human cervical cancer tumor tissues in comparison with normal tissues, as evaluated by RT-PCR.
Consistently, the levels of miR-126-5p were also significantly reduced in cervical cancer cell lines when compared to normal cervical epithelial cells.
Flow cytometric analysis showed that the rate of apoptosis of cervical cancer cells was significantly increased by miR-126-5p overexpression but inhibited by miR-126-5p inhibitor.
A similar change pattern was observed in the expression of apoptosis-regulated protein caspase 3 in cervical cancer cells transfected with miR-126-5p mimic or inhibitor.
By bioinformatic prediction with online databases and verification using luciferase reporter assay, we then identified that Bcl2l2 is a direct target of miR-126-5p in cervical cancer cells.
The expression of Bcl2l2 was strongly downregulated by the miR-126-5p mimic but upregulated by the miR-126-5p inhibitor in cervical cancer cells, and Bcl2l2 expression was significantly increased in human cervical cancer tumor tissues, which was negatively correlated with miR-126-5p levels.
Furthermore, we confirmed that the rate of apoptosis was significantly increased by Bcl2l2 silencing in cervical cancer cells, which was not affected by the miR-126-5p inhibitor.
In summary, miR-126-5p plays an inhibitory role in human cervical cancer progression, regulating the apoptosis of cancer cells via directly targeting Bcl2l2.
Patients with miR-126*low myelodysplastic syndrome had significantly lower response rates (P = 0.04) and higher relapse rates (P = 0.03), as well as shorter progression-free (PFS; P = 0.004) and overall survival (OS; P = 0.004).
In the present study, the relationship between miR-126-5p/3p expression levels and overall survival in 109 patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) who received intensive therapy were evaluated.
The presence of XBP-1s, the active form of XBP-1, after administration of anti-Ig to Akata Burkitt's lymphoma cells is consistent with a role for this factor in reactivation of the EBV lytic cycle, although signalling through MEF2D was quantitatively much more significant in activation of Zp.
As expected, markers of neuronal differentiation such as anti-apoptotic protein B-cell lymphoma 2 (BCL2), myocyte enhancer factor-2D (MEF2D) and zipper protein kinase (MAP3K12; aka ZPK/MUK/DLK) were each up-regulated in response to differentiation.
The decrease in T-Shc and T1 were less obvious in mucinous adenocarcinoma and not observed in serous or endometrioid adenocarcinoma.
Overexpression of the signalling adaptor protein ShcD in melanoma was found to be a prerequisite for melanoma migration and invasion.
We have further demonstrated that ShcD accumulates in the nucleus upon hydrogen peroxide treatment in FLAG-ShcD expressing HEK293 cells, as well as 518.A2 melanoma cells.
We suggest that ShcD nuclear translocation might provide melanoma cells with a mechanism that enables them to resist DNA damage due to oxidative stress.
Rai like protein (RaLP) is a newly identified Src homology 2 domain containing (Shc) family member selectively expressed during the transition to metastatic melanoma and thus is a potential melanoma-specific drugable target.
Mutations in ABHD5 gene are associated with the onset of Chanarin-Dorfman syndrome (CDS), a rare autosomal recessive lipid storage disorder, characterized by non-bullous congenital ichthyosiform erythroderma (NCIE), hepatomegaly and liver steatosis.
It is an autosomal recessive disease caused by mutations in the ABHD5 gene.
Mutations of comparative gene identification 58 (CGI-58) in humans cause Chanarin-Dorfman syndrome, a rare autosomal recessive disease in which excess triacylglycerol (TAG) accumulates in multiple tissues.
The case histories of two children (aged two months) affected by myocarditis showing an atypical band of serum creatine kinase (EC 2.7.3.2; CK) in the CK isoenzyme electrophoretic pattern are reported.
The objective of this study was to evaluate the nephroprotective potential of resveratrol and piperine at same dose on cationic bovine serum albumin (cBSA) induced immune complex glomerulonephritis (ICGN) in BALB/c mice.
The object of the present study was to investigate the effects of VA, alone and in combination with methylprednisolone (MP), on cationic bovine serum albumin (cBSA induced immune-complex glomerulonephritis in female BALB/c mice.
Bovine serum albumin (BSA) glomerulonephritis is a type of immune complex glomerulonephritis that is characterized by a large number of leukocytes infiltrating the kidney.
The aim of this study is to show the results of the retrospective analysis (2010-2012) on hospital discharge records (HDRs) related to diseases potentially due to S. pneumoniae, using a selection of ICD9-CM codes.
The aim of this study is to show the results of the retrospective analysis (2010-2012) on hospital discharge records (HDRs) related to diseases potentially due to S. pneumoniae, using a selection of ICD9-CM codes.
GATA binding protein 3 (GATA3) and suppressors of cytokine signalling3 mRNA were differentially regulated in HDM and influenza-stimulated cultures+/-IFN-Beta.
In this article we review the current available evidence describing the effects of allopurinol in hypertension, kidney disease, and coronary heart disease, highlighting unresolved issues surrounding allopurinol use for uric acid lowering in individuals without gout.
Many epidemiological studies have evaluated associations of platelet glycoprotein receptor alpha2beta1 integrin (ITGA2) and glycoprotein IIIa (ITGB3) gene polymorphisms with diabetic retinopathy (DR), but the published data are inconclusive.
Genetic polymorphisms of the alpha2beta1 integrin and glycoprotein IIIa (GPIIIa) have been associated with myocardial infarction, stroke, and diabetic retinopathy.
Immunostaining procedures were used to seek for the expression of the following 30 membrane antigens related to the immune system, using dendriform cells obtained in conjunctival specimens from 80 normal subjects and 105 with chronic conjunctivitis: class II antigens HLADR and DQ, CD1a (T6) and CD5, which usually mark Langerhans cells, macrophage markers CD14, CD36 and CD63, various lymphocyte antigens (CD2, CD4 and CD8), receptor to interleukin 2 (CD25), adhesion molecules and integrins (CD11a, CD11b, CD11c, CD18, CD29, CD41, CD61), the selectin CD62, ICAM-1 (CD54), ICAM-3 (CD50) and ELAM-1, CD45RO, related to activation of immune cells, and its ligand CD22, receptors to immunoglobulins (CD23 and CD32) and complement (CD21), transferrin receptor CD71, tryptase and vimentin, were thus investigated.
In order to elucidate the involvement of adhesion mechanisms in the process of megakaryocyte-dependent fibroblast growth, we applied BSA-coupled polymers of glucose, galactose, fucose, mannose, and several lectins (AAA, LCA, LTA, UEA-I) to cocultures of CD61 -positive (CD61+)/MACS-enriched megakaryocytes and human bone marrow fibroblasts.
Complications included pyogenic granuloma (10 patients, 24.4%), exposure keratopathy (7 patients, 17.1%) lagophthalmos (5 patients, 12.2%), ectropion (6 patients, 14.6%), lateral canthal dystopia (2 cases, 4.9%), eyelid notch (2 cases, 4.9%) and trichiasis (4 cases, 9.8%).
Complications included eyelid margin notch (3 cases), persistent canthal dystopia (3 cases), trichiasis (2 cases), pyogenic granuloma (2 cases), eyelid margin nodule (1 case), lower eyelid elevation of 1 mm (1 case), and mild resolving medial lagophthalmos (1 case).
After operation slight entropion occurred in 8 cases, slight ectropion in 3 cases, lagophthalmos for 2 -- 3 mm in 7 cases, notch of the palpebral margin in 5 cases and thinness of the donor tarsal plates in 4 cases, but the functional and aesthetic results were normal.
We screened the exons of RAY1/ST7 and ST7OT1-3 for sequence variants in 90 unrelated autism probands and identified several rare variants, including a Ile361Val substitution.
Several signaling systems downstream of G-CSFR have been identified that are defective or hyperactivated in myeloid cells of patients with congenital neutropenia: severely reduced expression of myeloid-specific transcription factors LEF-1 and C/EBPAlfa, severely reduced expression and functions of HCLS1 protein, severely reduced expression of neutrophil elastase protein, dramatic compensatory up-regulation of the NAMPT/NAD(+)/SIRT pathway leading to continuous activation of emergency granulopoiesis via the transcription factor C/EBPBeta, and hyperactivation of STAT5 protein by tyrosine phosphorylation.
We observed spontaneous osteoclastogenesis with a significant increase in OC formation and bone resorbing activity in late-stage CKD and HD patients when compared with early-stage CKD patients and healthy donors, likely due to an increased expression of RANKL and LIGHT (homologous to Lymphotoxins exhibiting Inducible expression and competing with herpes simplex virus Glycoprotein D for herpes virus entry mediator [HVEM], a receptor expressed by T lymphocytes) in PBMCs.
Healthy individuals of African ancestry have neutropenia that has been linked with the variant rs2814778(G) of the gene encoding atypical chemokine receptor 1 (ACKR1).
Here we describe an unexpected fundamental role for ACKR1 in hematopoiesis and provide the mechanism that links its absence with neutropenia.
The absence of erythroid ACKR1 altered mouse hematopoiesis including stem and progenitor cells, which ultimately gave rise to phenotypically distinct neutrophils that readily left the circulation, causing neutropenia.
In vivo studies in Adult Dark Agouti (DA) rats with unilateral surgically-induced ocular hypertension (OHT) treated with either CoQ10/TPGS micelles or TPGS vehicle twice daily for three weeks were performed, following which retinal cell health was assessed in vivo using DARC (Detection of Apoptotic Retinal Cells) and post-mortem with Brn3a histological assessment on whole retinal mounts.
After correction for multiple testing, DARC polymorphism rs3027012 in 5'-UTR was associated with higher risk of low absolute phagocyte count (APC&lt;500 and &lt;1000 cells per microliter, P=0.001 and P&lt;0.0005, respectively) and hospitalization due to febrile neutropenia (P=0.002).
We examined the effects of PR and EZ on NPC1L1, ABCG5, and ABCG8 expression in human hepatoma HepG2 cells and the murine small intestine.
In addition, knockdown of epigenetic regulator UHRF1 (ubiquitin-like, containing PHD and RING finger domains 1) in RIP3-null cancer cells reduces the methylation level of the Rip3 promoter.
A previous study revealed that ubiquitin-like with PHD and RING finger domains 1 (UHRF1) promoted cell proliferation and was a potential biomarker in medulloblastoma (MB).
Three lncRNAs, sex determining region Y-box 2 overlapping transcript (SOX2-OT), NCBP2 antisense RNA 2 (NCBP2-AS2) and ubiquitin like with PHD and ring finger domains 1 (UHRF1), were predicted to be associated with lung cancer; RT-qPCR confirmed that SOX2-OT and NCBP2-AS2 were associated with lung cancer.
UHRF1 (ubiquitin-like, with PHD and RING finger domains 1) plays a crucial role in DNA methylation, chromatin remodeling and gene expression and is aberrantly upregulated in various types of human cancers.
UHRF1 (ubiquitin-like with PHD and RING finger domains 1) is a critical regulator for DNA methylation, and its frequent overexpression in human cancers has been associated with tumor-promoting effects.
The lower level of PHRF1 mRNA was observed in human lung cancer tissues than that in paracancerous tissues.
In conclusion, our findings suggest that overexpression of PHRF1 attenuated the proliferation and tumorigenicity of non-small cell lung cancer cell line of H1299.
Recessive mutations in ORC1, ORC4, ORC6, CDT1 or CDC6 of the preRC in human cause Meier-Gorlin syndrome (MGS) that is characterized by impaired post-natal growth, short stature and microcephaly.
Mutations in ORC1, ORC4, ORC6, CDT1, and CDC6, which encode proteins required for DNA replication origin licensing, cause Meier-Gorlin syndrome (MGS), a disorder conferring microcephaly, primordial dwarfism, underdeveloped ears, and skeletal abnormalities.
Significantly higher concentrations of HMGB1 were found in nasal secretions from patients with chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyp or allergic rhinitis compared with the control subjects.
Previous studies have shown that HMGB1 is elevated in the nasal lavage fluids (NLF) of children suffering from allergic rhinitis (AR) and is associated with the severity of this disease.
The major cystinosis mutation is a 57 kb deletion on human chromosome 17p13 that removes the majority of CTNS and the entire adjacent gene, CARKL/SHPK.
The most common mutation in the nephropathic cystinosis (CTNS) gene is a homozygous 57-kb deletion that also includes an adjacent gene carbohydrate kinase-like (CARKL).
Analysis of the resulting data revealed a number of interesting features about this genomic region, including the long-range organization of CTNS, insight about the breakpoints and intervening DNA associated with the common cystinosis-causing deletion, and structural information about five genes neighboring CTNS (human ortholog of rat vanilloid receptor subtype 1 gene, CARKL, TIP-1, P2X5, and HUMINAE).
In particular, sequence analysis detected the presence of a novel gene (CARKL) residing within the most common cystinosis-causing deletion.
Interestingly, both CTNS and CARKL are absent in nearly half of all cystinosis patients (i.e., those homozygous for the common deletion).
There is limited evidence regarding interactions between pulmonary (dys)function, posture, and mobility of the upper body quadrant in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
Background There is limited evidence regarding interactions between pulmonary (dys)function, posture, and mobility of the upper body quadrant in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
Recent progress in our understanding of the developmental regulation of this tissue, the differentiation pathways, recognition of pathogens and antimicrobial responses is now exploited to help understand how epithelial cell function and dysfunction contributes to the pathogenesis of a variety of inflammatory lung diseases.
Herein, advances in our knowledge of the biology of airway epithelium, as well as its role and (dys)function in asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary fibrosis and cystic fibrosis will be discussed.
Managing neurogenic dysphagia with effective protection of the airway passages and prompt treatment of aspiration pneumonias is necessary to prevent respiratory failure.
Multivariate analysis identified four independent risk factors for mortality in patients with severe sepsis and septic shock: three or more organ dysfunctions (OR, 3.212; 95% CI, 1.585-6.506; p&lt;0.001), acute respiratory failure (OR, 2.649 95% CI, 1.327-5.287; p=0.006), positive blood culture (OR, 2.708; 95% CI, 1.289-5.689; p=0.009) and chronic heart failure (OR, 2.112; 95% CI, 1.036-4.308; p=0.040).
Our results highlight the importance of three or more organ dys-functions, acute respiratory failure, positive blood culture and chronic heart failure as independent risk factors for mortality in the first 24 hours after admission in patients with severe sepsis and septic shock.
This review briefly touches on CF genetics as it applies to lung disease and will focus on the current hypotheses of CFTR (dys)function and its impact on pulmonary fluid homeostasis.
To investigate the expression of the CDH13 gene and BCR/ABL fusion gene in chronic myeloid leukemia(CML) patients at different stages and explore their relationship.
We performed genomewide screening for methylated CpG islands and identified 8 genes frequently methylated in leukemia cell lines and in patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML): NOR1, CDH13, p15, NPM2, OLIG2, PGR, HIN1, and SLC26A4.
Although defective progenitor-stromal adhesion is a well-recognized feature of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML), the role of CDH13 abnormalities has not been evaluated in this disease.
Recent work from our laboratory suggested pIgR may be upregulated in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC).
In this work we investigated the expression of the SERCA3-type calcium pump in choroid plexus epithelial cells grown in vitro, and in normal and hyperplastic choroid plexus tissue, in choroid plexus papillomas displaying various degrees of atypia, and in choroid plexus carcinoma by immunohistochemistry in situ.
Whereas normal choroid plexus epithelial cells express SERCA3 abundantly, SERCA3 expression is strongly decreased in papillomas, and is absent in choroid plexus carcinoma, while expression in hyperplastic epithelium is high, similarly to normal epithelium.
Due to the inverse interaction of Rac1 and Ras homolog family member A (RhoA) signaling in the transition between mesenchymal and amoeboid morphology, simultaneous treatment of NSC23766 and Y27632 (selective Rho associated coiled-coil containing protein kinase 1 inhibitor), abolished U87 GBM cell migration through inhibiting MAT and amoeboid-mesenchymal transition.
The combined inhibition of Rac1 and RhoA signaling would be a promising strategy to suppress GBM invasion.
Specifically, combination therapy inhibited TLR7 expression in the kidneys of mice with lupus nephritis; combination of tacrolimus and mycophenolate mofetil led to better stabilization of the podocyte actin cytoskeleton through the reciprocal regulation of RhoA and Rac1 activities.
We hypothesized that mutations in AP2S1 and GNA11 are causative in Danish patients with suspected FHH and that these mutations are not found in patients with primary hyperparathyroidism (PHPT), which is the main differential diagnostic disorder.
Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia (FHH) is a genetically heterogeneous condition resembling primary hyperparathyroidism (PHPT) but not curable by surgery; FHH types 1, 2, and 3 are due to loss-of-function mutations of the CASR, GNA11, or AP2S1 genes, respectively.
The aim of this study was to analyse prevalence and pathogenicity of CaSR, GNA11 and AP2S1 mutations in patients with an FHH phenotype and to compare them with a sample of patients with primary hyperparathyroidism (PHPT) in order to identify the most useful laboratory parameter for a differential diagnosis.
Tripartite motif-containing protein 37 (TRIM37), a new member of the RING-B-box-coiled-coil (RBCC) subfamily of zinc finger proteins, was found to be involved in the development and progression of several cancers.
In the present work, we clearly demonstrate that HMGB1 secreted by cancer cells is N-glycosylated at Asn37, which facilitates monocytic (M)-MDSC differentiation from bone marrow via the p38/NFKB/Erk1/2 pathway and also contributes to conversion of monocytes into MDSC-like cells; HMGB1 blockade by a monoclonal antibody against the HMGB1 B box obviously reduced the accumulation of M-MDSC in tumor-bearing mice, delaying tumor growth and development; additionally, MDSC expansion and HMGB1 up-regulation were also found in breast cancer patients.
We examined a possible association between the COMT Val158Met polymorphism and conversion disorder in a study of 48 patients with conversion disorder and 48 control patients.
We conclude that the COMT Val158Met genotype is quite common in Turkey and that it is not a risk factor for conversion disorder in the Turkish population.
Factor VII (FVII) activating protease (FSAP) is a circulating serine protease that is likely to be involved in a number of disease conditions such as stroke, atherosclerosis, liver fibrosis, thrombosis and cancer.
With purpose to study content of alpha-defensins (1-3) and synthesis and liberation of other proteins and peptides by neutrophils the concentrations of alpha-defensins, lipoprotein (alpha), C-reactive protein, precursor of cerebral natriuretic peptide, coagulation factor VII and von Willebrand factor were determined in supernatants of leukocytal cultures in patients with exertional angina pectoris and atherosclerosis of lower extremities.
The frequency of HLA-DR4 was increased in patients with optic neuritis alone compared to controls and to patients with multiple sclerosis, but further studies are required to confirm this finding.
The MS profiling by PGC-LC also revealed several glycan structural isomers that corresponded to LacdiNAc-type (GalNAcBeta1-4GlcNAc) motifs that were unique to the serous ovarian cancers and that correlated with elevated gene expression of B4GALNT3 and B4GALNT4 in patients with serous cancer.
We previously showed that B4GALNT3 overexpression enhances colon cancer cell malignant phenotypes in vitro and in vivo.
However, the role of B4GALNT3 in cancer stemness remains unclear.
We found that B4GALNT3 expression was positively correlated with advanced stages and poor survival in colorectal cancer patients.
Knockdown of B4GALNT3 using small interfering (si) RNAs in colon cancer cell lines (HCT116, SW480, HCT15, and HT29 cells) decreased sphere formation and the expression of stem cell markers, OCT4 and NANOG.
Taken together, these data suggest B4GALNT3 regulates cancer stemness and the invasive properties of colon cancer cells through modifying EGFR glycosylation and signaling.
In this study, we investigated the expression and role of B4GALNT3 in human neuroblastoma (NB).
Detection rates were as follows: IL-7: NVG higher than POAG; IL-10: POAG lower than cataract or NVG; and GM-CSF: cataract higher than POAG or NVG.
Sixty-four vitreous samples (40 RVO, 24 controls with idiopathic floaters) were analyzed in this retrospective case series using LC/MS for LPAs 16:0, 18:0, 18:1, 20:4, and ELISA kits or Luminex technology for ATX, angiopoetin-1 (ANG-1), interleukin-6 (IL-6), interleukin-7 (IL-7), interleukin-8 (IL-8), monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1), pigment epithelium-derived factor (PEDF), and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF).
Poly I:C induces IL-7 production, early inflammatory responses, and characteristic pathologies of SS-like dacryoadenitis in non-autoimmune-prone C57BL/6 mice.
Diagnosis of AIDS-NHL was preceded by a significantly elevated frequency of activated/germinal center-like CD19CD10CD71CD86AID B cells (P = 0.0072), elevated serum prevalence of the TLR2 ligand, and significantly elevated B-cell TLR2 expression (P = 0.0015), positively correlating with the frequency of activated/germinal center-like B cells (rho = 0.7273, P = 0.0144).
TLR2-stimulated purified B cells exhibited the activated B-cell phenotype observed in HIV+ subjects before AIDS-NHL diagnosis.
These results indicate that an elevated fraction of B cells display an activated/germinal center phenotype in those HIV+ subjects who go on to develop AIDS-NHL and suggest that TLR2-mediated activation may play a role in HIV infection-associated B-cell activation, potentially contributing to the genesis of AIDS-NHL.
The regulatory role of AVP on the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis suggests potential uses for AVP receptor modulators in various CNS indications, including depression, anxiety and post-traumatic stress disorder.
When POLN was ectopically overexpressed in human cells, it specifically coimmunoprecipitated with the homologous recombination factors BRCA1 and FANCJ, but not with previously suggested interaction partners (HELQ and members of the Fanconi anemia core complex).
Moreover, we obtained evidence for physical and functional interaction of POLN with factors belonging to the Fanconi anemia pathway, a master regulator of cross-link repair.
The results indicate that the Pol n I component MV is an allergen for human beings as well as for mice, and useful as a diagnostic tool for chironomid allergy.
Prevalence of service receipt was highest among women in the highest family income category (&gt;400% of federal poverty level [FPL]) and among women with insurance coverage for each of the following: contraceptive services among women at risk for unintended pregnancy; medical services beyond advice to help achieve pregnancy; vaccinations (hepatitis B and human papillomavirus [HPV], ever; tetanus, past 10 years; influenza, past year); discussions with a health care professional about improving health before pregnancy and taking vitamins with folic acid; blood pressure and diabetes screening; discussions with a health care professional in the past year about diet, among those with obesity; discussions with a health care professional in the past year about smoking, among current smokers; Pap tests within the past 3 years; and mammograms within the past 2 years.
Herein we describe a new phenotype associated with a mutation in exon 11 of the LMNA gene: hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, atrioventricular block, severe dyslipidemia and diabetes.
Independent analysis of LMNA variants via the type 2 diabetes (T2D) Knowledge Portal showed that variant p.G602S associated significantly with type 2 diabetes (p = 0.02; odds ratio = 4.58), and was more frequent in African Americans (allele frequency 0.297%).
Lipodystrophy is a rare disorder characterized by the complete or partial loss of subcutaneous adipose tissue, insulin resistance, diabetes mellitus and hyperlipidemia.Proteinuric renal disease is a prevalent feature of generalized lipodystrophy but rare in familial partial lipodystrophy.Patients carrying the c.1045C &gt; T missense LMNA mutation (p.R349W) may present with familial partial lipodystrophy, proteinuric nephropathy, cardiomyopathy and atypical myopathy.
BAT 5'-deiodinase activity was unaffected by propylthiouracil (PTU) and was elevated in hypothyroid rats, whereas EPI 5'-deiodinase was totally inhibited by PTU and was depressed in hypothyroidism.
Here, we report a novel mutation in ERCC8 gene in a 16-year-old boy who suffers from poor weight gain, short stature, microcephaly, intellectual disability, and photosensitivity.
Cockayne syndrome is caused by biallelic ERCC8 (CSA) or ERCC6 (CSB) mutations and is characterized by growth restriction, microcephaly, developmental delay, and premature pathological aging.
This study included 54 beta-thalassemia major patients divided into 2 groups; group A consisted of 28 patients who have thrombocytosis secondary to a previous splenectomy and group B comprised of 26 patients who did not have a splenectomy with normal platelet count, as well as a control group of 30 healthy individuals.
A microarray analysis of the B-1 lymphocytes revealed that IL-10 deficiency is associated with down-regulation of the genes that code for claudin-10, a protein that is involved in cell-to-cell contact and that has been linked to lung adenocarcinoma.
Thus, our findings suggest that the axis IL-10/claudin-10 is a promising target for the development of therapeutic agents against aggressive melanoma.
To explore the expression distinction of the cell adhesion proteins claudin-10,-14,-17 and E-cadherin in the adjacent non-neoplastic tissues and gastric cancer tissues, 50 gastric cancer tissues and 50 samples of adjacent non-neoplastic tissues adjacent to the tumors were examined for expression of claudin-10,-14,-17 and E-cadherin by streptavidin-perosidase immunohistochemical staining method.
The positive expression rates of claudin-10 in gastric cancer tissues and adjacent non-neoplastic tissues were 24% and 72% respectively (P &lt; 0.01).
In contrast, the positive expression rates of claudin-14 in gastric cancer tissues and adjacent non-neoplastic tissues were 58% and 24% respectively (P = 0.015 &lt; 0.05) Thus in our study, the expression of E-cadherin, claudin-10, and claudin-17 was down-regulated in gastric cancer tissue while the expression of claudin-14 was up-regulated.
Our study reveals that the expression of E-cadherin, claudin-10, and claudin-17 were down-regulated in gastric cancer tissue while the expression of claudin-14 was up-regulated and correlation between claudins and E-cadherin expression with lymphatic metastasis were observed.
Four genes (MMP-2, c-fos, claudin 1 (CLDN1) and claudin 10(CLDN10)) were correlated with the results of microarray and real time RT-PCR analyses for the gene-expression data in samples from 41 patients with lung adenocarcinoma.
Immunohistochemical staining for these genes in samples from 81 cases of lung adenocarcinoma demonstrated the expressions of CLDN1 and CLDN10 were correlated with overall survival of patients with lung adenocarcinoma.
Overexpression of CLDN1 and CLDN10 indicates a favorable prognosis for overall survival in some patients with lung adenocarcinoma.
Furthermore, circadian regulation of Gnaz was disturbed in the db/db mouse, a model of diabetic retinopathy.
The highest rates of somatic, non-synonymous mutations were found in GNG10 and GNAZ, neither of which has been previously reported to be mutated in melanoma.
Various other protein products of genes associated with bipolar disorder either bind to or are affected by phosphatidyl-inositol phosphate products of this pathway (ADBRK2, HIP1R, KCNQ2, RGS4, WFS1), are associated with its constituent elements (BCR, DUSP6, FAT, GNAZ) or are downstream targets of this signalling cascade (DPYSL2, DRD3, GAD1, G6PD, GCH1, KCNQ2, NOS3, SLC6A3, SLC6A4, SST, TH, TIMELESS).
In a recent study we found that the risk for unilateral retinoblastoma in offspring is 4 fold higher in women that are homozygotes for the 19 bp deletion in the DHFR gene and took folic acid supplement during pregnancy.
Retinoblastoma protein (pRb) was highly phosphorylated but p107 was upregulated, and the expression of E2f target genes was dysregulated as shown by upregulation of Cdc6 but downregulation of cyclin E, dihydrofolate reductase (dhfr), Cdc25a and B-Myb in chondrocytes of K6(H)/D1(H) mice.
The authors used a case-control study design to examine the association between retinoblastoma risk and maternal variations in the folate-metabolizing genes methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) (a cytosine-to-thymine substitution at nucleotide 677 [MTHFR677C-&gt;T]; reference single nucleotide polymorphism rs1801133) and dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) (a 19-base-pair deletion of intron 1a [DHFR19bpdel]; rs70991108).
The risk of having a child with unilateral retinoblastoma was associated with maternal homozygosity for DHFR19bpdel (odds ratio, 3.78; 95% confidence interval, 1.89-7.55; P = .0002), even after controlling for the child's DHFR19bpdel genotype (odds ratio, 2.81; 95% confidence interval, 1.32-5.99; P = .0073).
Maternal homozygosity for a polymorphism in the DHFR gene necessary for converting synthetic folic acid into biologic folate was associated with an increased risk for retinoblastoma.
To explore the role of Major Vault Protein (MVP) in oral cavity squamous cell carcinoma patients.
Molecular analysis of the GYS2 gene was not feasible, but this particular gene was included in the panel of hypoglycemia of whole exome sequencing (WES) which was at our disposal.
To understand the frequency of GSD0 in patients presenting with ketotic hypoglycaemia and to report a novel mutation in the GYS2 gene.
The GYS2 gene was sequenced in 50 patients diagnosed with ketotic hypoglycaemia.
Sequencing of the GYS2 gene is more likely to be positive in patients with fasting ketotic hypoglycaemia and concomitant postprandial hyperglycaemia with hyperlactataemia.
Biochemical evaluation as well as direct sequencing of exons and exon-intron boundary regions of the GYS2 gene were performed in a patient presenting fasting hypoglycemia and postprandial hyperglycemia and her parents.
A 7 year-old boy presenting with growth retardation, fasting hypoglycemia and ketoacidosis was diagnosed as having both idiopathic growth hormone (GH) deficiency and hepatic glycogen synthase (GS) deficiency caused by a homozygous mutation in exon 5 of the liver glycogen synthase gene (GYS-2).
GPB dosed at 6 mL BID lowered fasting ammonia levels in cirrhotic patients with HE as compared with baseline, was better tolerated than 9 mL BID, and is appropriate for further evaluation in patients with cirrhosis and episodic HE.
GPB reduced HE events as well as ammonia in patients with cirrhosis and HE and its safety profile was similar to placebo.
In vitro and clinical studies have been performed to assess GPB digestion, safety, and pharmacology in healthy adults and individuals with cirrhosis.
GPB exhibits delayed release characteristics, presumably reflecting gradual PBA release by pancreatic lipases, and is well tolerated in adults with cirrhosis, suggesting that further clinical testing for HE is warranted.
However, the role of S1PR1 in the progression of human acute myeloid leukemia (AML) remains to be fully elucidated.
Using overexpression and RNA interference knockdown assays, it was shown that the expression of S1PR1 in several human myeloid leukemia cell lines contributed to the suppression of cell apoptosis and promotion of cell proliferation.
Circulating chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) cells display an abnormal increase in the surface levels of the homing receptors CCR7 and CXCR4 concomitant with low S1P receptor 1 (S1P1) expression.
Previous work in our laboratory identified keratin 17 (K17) as a specific and sensitive biomarker for high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesions and cervical squamous cell carcinoma (SCC).
In this study, we show that high expression of keratin-17 (K17) predicts poor outcome in patients with cervical cancer, at early or late stages of disease, surpassing in accuracy either tumor staging or loss of p27(KIP1) as a negative prognostic marker in this setting.
In summary, both KRT4 and KRT17 expressions are related to the histopathology of the cervical squamous mucosa; KRT17 is highly overexpressed in immature squamous metaplasia, in HSIL, and in squamous cell carcinoma and the level of KRT17 in squamous cell carcinoma may help to identify patients who are at greatest risk for cervical cancer mortality.
P2X4 receptors in microglia are up-regulated in epilepsy and in neuropathic pain; that is to say, their total and/or PM expression levels increase.
Expression of several members of the family including P2X2, P2X4, and P2X7 receptors has been reported to be altered in the hippocampus following status epilepticus.
Recent work also found altered neuronal injury and inflammation after status epilepticus in mice lacking the P2X4 receptor.
In this study, we investigated the potential involvement of P2X4R in microglial functions in a model of kainate (KA)-induced status epilepticus (SE).
Here we show that, in the seizure-sensitive (SS) gerbil hippocampus, a recognized genetic epilepsy model, the expressions of both P2X2 and P2X4 receptors are markedly decreased as compared with that in the seizure-resistant (SR) gerbil.
In addition to pathogen recognition, DCIR has been shown to be pivotal in preventing autoimmune disease by controlling dendritic cell proliferation.
This study was aimed to further investigate whether DCIR polymorphisms are novel susceptibility factors for other autoimmune diseases, i.e.
Tubulointerstitial nephritis and uveitis syndrome, HLA-B27-associated uveitis, inflammatory bowel disease, and Kawasaki disease each made up fewer than 5% of diagnoses.
Stromal tissue was isolated from epithelial cells with laser capture microdissection (LCMD) and analyzed by cDNA array for the expression of TGFalpha, TGF-beta1, HGF, PDGF-alpha, IGFII, bFGF, aFGF, VEGFC, and VEGF.
Here, we demonstrate that Inositol Polyphosphate-5-Phosphatase F (INPP5F), one of the polyphosphoinositide phosphatases, is differentially expressed in GSCs from glioma patients, and is identified as an inhibitor of STAT3 signaling via interaction with STAT3 and inhibition of its phosphorylation.
In addition, loss of INPP5F gene in gliomas is significantly correlated with lower overall patient survivals.
These findings suggest that INPP5F is a potential tumor suppressor in gliomas via inhibition of STAT3 pathway, and that deregulation of INPP5F may lead to contribution to gliomagenesis.
The patient and his identical twin show a retinal dystrophy that, based on clinical appearance, visual fields, amd electrophysiology, is most likely autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa.
Although Gln supplementation had no effect on the loss of the tight junction protein occludin, the increased portal endotoxin and fasting glucose concentrations found in WSD-fed mice, markers of liver damage (e.g., nonalcoholic fatty liver disease activity score and number of neutrophils in the liver) were significantly lower in the WSD+Gln group than in the WSD group (~47% and ~60% less, respectively; P &lt; 0.05).
The purpose of this Evidence-Based Practice (EBP) paper is to answer PICOT questions by a review the effectiveness of chronotherapeutics interventions on depressive symptoms with depression and the depressive episode in the course of bipolar disorder.
We evaluated whether post-bronchiolitis asthma was associated with polymorphisms in the TLR3 rs3775291, TLR4 rs4986790, TLR7 rs179008, TLR8 rs2407992, TLR9 rs187084, and TLR10 rs4129009 genes.
There were no significant associations between TLR3, TLR4, TLR8, or TLR9 polymorphisms and post-bronchiolitis asthma.
Significant associations with SAFS compared with atopic asthma included Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3) (p = .009), TLR9 (p = .025), C-type lectin domain family seven member A (dectin-1) (p = .043), interleukin-10 (IL-10) (p = .0010), mannose-binding lectin (MBL2) (p = .007), CC-chemokine ligand 2 (CCL2) (2 SNPs, p = .025 and .041), CCL17 (p = .002), plasminogen (p = .049) and adenosine A2a receptor (p = .024).
Asthmatics had significantly lower circulating HPC expressing TLR-2 and TLR-9 with a similar trend for TLR-4.
The endosomal TLRs have been shown to be associated with the induction of asthmatic inflammation (TLR3), and with disease exacerbations (TLR7, TLR8 and TLR9).
A defect in the P-protein component of the glycine cleavage system has been the most frequent abnormality found in patients with glycine encephalopathy (NKH).
Soluble tumor necrosis factor receptor 1 (sTNF-R1), interleukin-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1Ra), von Willebrand factor (VWF), and osteoprotegerin (OPG) were measured in schizophrenia (n = 69) and affective (n = 55) spectrum patients at baseline and at one-year follow-up, and compared to healthy controls (HC) (n = 92) with analysis of covariance.
Serum sTNFR1 was significantly higher in patients with acute-stage schizophrenia compared to matched controls while no significant group differences were observed for the other markers.
Plasma levels of soluble tumor necrosis factor receptor 1 (sTNF-R1), interleukin 1 receptor antagonist (IL-1Ra), osteoprotegerin (OPG), and von Willebrand factor (vWf) were measured in patients (n=992) with schizophrenia spectrum (SCZ, n=584), schizoaffective disorder (SA, n=93), affective spectrum disorders (AFF, n=315), and healthy controls (HC, n=638).
MIS includes 10 components: dry weight changes, dietary intake, functional capacity, comorbidity, muscle wasting and loss of subcutaneous fat as well as body mass index (BMI), serum albumin level and total iron binding capacity (TIBC).
This study suggests that consecutive PNC contributed to the improvement of the protein intake, serum levels of albumin, cholesterol and to the delay of muscle wasting, which could also have a positive impact on the nutritional status, particularly in malnourished patients receiving HD treatment.
GCs = glucocorticoids; HDG = high-dose glucocorticoids; A1C = Hemoglobin A1C; GA = Glycated Albumin; FBG = fasting blood glucose; IG = interstitial glucose; BG = blood glucose; GIH = Glucocorticoids-induced hyperglycemia; HOMA-IR = Homeostasis Model Assessment-Insulin Resistance; CGMS = continuous glucose monitoring system; AUC = the area under the curve; MODD = absolute means of daily differences; LAGE = the largest amplitude of glycemic excursions; BMI = body mass index; DM = diabetes mellitus; SLE = systemic lupus erythematosus; IQR = interquartile range; HR = hazard ratio; PUMCH = Peking Union Medical College Hospital.
Objective To evaluate the presence and localization of folate receptor expressing macrophages in the rat groove model of osteoarthritis and determine the suitability of a new folate conjugate with albumin-binding entity (cm09) for in vivo SPECT (single-photon emission computed tomography) analysis.
Results In vivo SPECT/CT imaging of the new folate conjugate (cm09) was as useful as a folate conjugate without albumin-binding entity in the groove model of osteoarthritis with less renal accumulation.
However, the effects of agonistic anti-4-1BB Abs have not been examined in an experimental mouse model of psoriasis.
Therefore, we investigated the protective effects of agonistic anti-4-1BB Abs, using imiquimod (IMQ)-induced psoriasis-like dermatitis in mice, a condition histologically and clinically similar to human psoriasis.
We found that administration of agonistic anti-4-1BB Abs (10mg/kg) significantly alleviated the severity of IMQ-induced psoriasis-like skin inflammation in mice, with reduced histologic symptoms, including inflammatory infiltration, parakeratosis, and hyperkeratosis.
Taken together, our data provide evidence that agonistic anti-4-1BB Abs possesses immunosuppressive properties in IMQ-induced psoriasis-like skin inflammation, providing insight into the immunomodulatory effect of agonistic anti-4-1BB Abs for psoriasis immunotherapy.
Among identified psoriasis risk variants, three were more strongly associated with PsC than PsA (rs12189871 near HLA-C, p = 5.0 x 10(-19); rs4908742 near TNFRSF9, p = 0.00020; rs10888503 near LCE3A, p = 0.0014), and two were more strongly associated with PsA than PsC (rs12044149 near IL23R, p = 0.00018; rs9321623 near TNFAIP3, p = 0.00022).
Interatrial electromechanical delay (IA-EMD) and intra-left atrial electromechanical delay (ILA-EMD) were significantly longer in the psoriasis group compared with controls.
To investigate the expression of the peripheral blood retinoid-related orphan receptor gamma t (RORgamma t) and 4-1BB/4-1BBL mRNA in oral lichen planus (OLP) patients.
Blood and tissue eosinophils from patients with IgE-mediated allergic responses (atopic dermatitis, extrinsic asthma) express CD137.
Proteomic analysis revealed 14 statistically significant differentially expressed proteins, with nine showing increased expression (PDIA3, VIM/HEXA, SELENBP1, ENO1, CAPZA1, ERP29, TPI1, PARK7, and FABP3) and five showing decreased expression (EIF2S, PSMA3, RPSA, TUBB, and TUBA1B) in uveal melanomas that subsequently metastasized compared with those that did not.
Among these, 14 genes (FTL, K-ALPHA1, LDHA, RPL4, ENO1, ANXA2, RPL9, RPL10, RPL13A, GNB2L1, AMBP, GC, A1BG, and SERPINC1), in addition to previously well-known liver cancer related genes, were confirmed to be differentially expressed in seven liver cancer cell lines and 17 HCC tissues by semi-quantitative RT-PCR.
Expression profiles of the 9 genes ACTB, ALAS1, G6PD, GAPD, HMBS, HPRT1, K-ALPHA-1, SDHA and TBP were established in matched malignant and nonmalignant tissue specimens from 14 patients with bladder cancer.
The use of HPRT1 alone as a reference gene shown in our study was sufficient, but the normalization factors generated from two (HRPT1, ALAS1) or all three genes (HRPT1, ALAS1, K-ALPHA-1) should be considered for an improved reliability of normalization in gene profiling studies of prostate cancer.
We show that glucose clearance rates are affected in both children with marasmus as well as kwashiorkor, which correlate with plasma albumin concentrations.
Although marasmus is characterized by clinical wasting, kwashiorkor is associated with peripheral edema, oxidative stress, hypoalbuminemia, and hypoglycemia.
Total proteins, albumin and transferrin were all significantly lower in children with edema than in those with marasmus.
In this condition, 8CR inhibited edema and myonecrosis induced by the sPLA2 activity of Crotalus durissus terrificus in a dose-dependent manner by decreasing interleukin-1Beta (IL-1Beta), tumor necrosis factor Alfa (TNF-Alfa), prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), and lipid peroxidation.
In addition, it was shown that Crotalus durissus terrificus sPLA2 increases cell oxidative stress during edema and myonecrosis, and the antioxidant properties of the polyphenolic compound may be significant in mitigating the pharmacological effect induced by sPLA2 and other snake venom toxins.
Moreover, 5CQA significantly decreased the enzymatic activity and the oedema and myonecrosis induced by native sPLA2.
This flavonoid was able to decrease enzymatic activity and some pharmacological effects, such as myonecrosis, platelet aggregation, and neurotoxic activity caused by sPLA2, however, the inflammatory effect was not affected by naringin.
Under the conditions tested, we observed that both Boc-5 and Boc-10 strongly decreased edema, myonecrosis, and neurotoxicity induced by native sPLA2.
Incubation with pertussis toxin prior to the addition of either sPLA2 or LPA only showed abrogation of the response to LPA, thus suggesting the involvement of pertussis-sensitive Gi-proteins in the case of LPA.
In contrast, all of the four classical CMNs tested were negative, as were cases of Wilms' tumor and clear cell sarcoma of the kidney.
The aspirates were from 16 cases of classical Wilms' tumor (WT), one anaplastic WT, 2 clear cell sarcomas of the kidney (CCSK), 2 malignant rhabdoid tumors of the kidney (MRTK) and 6 congenital mesoblastic nephromas (CMNs).
Archival tissue from 38 patients with superficial smooth muscle cell and so-called fibrohistiocytic tumors (8 benign fibrous histiocytomas (BFHs), 6 dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans (DFPT), 9 malignant fibrous histiocytomas (MFHs), 9 leiomyomas (LMs) and 6 leiomyosarcomas (LMSs)) were immunostained with antibodies against SMA, HCD, CALP, PLAP and HPL.
In cell culture, d12.CALP at low multiplicity of infection (0.001 plaque-forming unit/cell) selectively killed calponin-positive human synovial sarcoma, leiomyosarcoma, and osteosarcoma cells.
To investigate the possible role of beta-defensins in gingival health and periodontal disease, we examined the effect of several stimuli on the expression of interleukin-8 (IL-8), human beta-defensin-1, -2, -3, and -4 (hBD) in primary human diseased gingival epithelial (HGE) cell cultures from periodontitis patients by quantitative TaqMan reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).
Human gingival epithelial cells (HGE) express two antimicrobial peptides of the beta-defensin family, human beta-defensin 1 (hBD-1) and hBD-2, as well as cytokines and chemokines that contribute to innate immunity.
SSKcnj16-/- rats exhibited hypokalemia and reduced blood pressure, and when fed a high-salt diet (4% NaCl), experienced 100% mortality within a few days triggered by salt wasting and severe hypokalemia.
Hence, patients with HNF1Beta mutations may have reduced Kir5.1 activity in the kidney, resulting in hypokalemia and hypomagnesemia.
The Kir5.1(-/-) mice displayed hypokalemic, hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis with hypercalciuria.
In conclusion, disruption of Kcnj16 induces a severe renal phenotype that, apart from hypokalemia, is the opposite of the phenotype seen in SeSAME/EAST syndrome.
We found that Kir5.1(-/-) mice presented with persistent metabolic acidosis and a clear respiratory phenotype.
Despite metabolic acidosis, ventilation at rest and in hyperoxic hypercapnia were similar in wild-type and Kir5.1(-/-) mice.
We suggest that this compensatory modulation of the peripheral chemosensory inputs develops in Kir5.1(-/-) mice in order to counteract the effect of continuing metabolic acidosis on the activity of the peripheral chemoreceptors.
In this study, CYP2E1*5B, CYP2E1*6, CYP2E1*7B, GSTO1 (A140D), and TP53 (Arg72Pro) polymorphisms and response to platinum-based chemotherapy and survival in 137 advanced stage NSCLC patients were investigated.
GSTO1-1 expression pattern has not been studied in transitional cell carcinoma (TCC), as yet.
Increased GSTO1-1 expression might contribute to TCC development and/or progression supporting the notion that GSTO1-1 may be a promising novel cancer target.
Glutathione S-transferase omega 1 (GSTO1) is an atypical GST isoform that is overexpressed in several cancers and has been implicated in drug resistance.
Here we show that silencing of GSTO1 with siRNA significantly impairs cancer cell viability, validating GSTO1 as a potential new target in oncology.
These potent GSTO1 inhibitors suppress cancer cell growth, enhance the cytotoxic effects of cisplatin and inhibit tumour growth in colon cancer models as single agent.
Our findings demonstrate the therapeutic utility of GSTO1 inhibitors as anticancer agents and identify the novel cellular pathways under GSTO1 regulation in colorectal cancer.
To explore the relationship between angiogenin-1/2 (Ang-1/2) and clinical parameters of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), and to assess the value of Ang-1/2 in predicting the prognosis of patients with IPF.
Preterm infants exposed to oxygen and mechanical ventilation are at risk for bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD), a multifactorial chronic lung disorder characterized by arrested alveolar development and nonsprouting, dysmorphic microvascular angiogenesis.
Many genes previously known to be affected by BPA and involved in obesity, hypertension, or heart disease were altered following these treatments, and AP-1, EGR1, and EGFR were key hubs affected by BPA and/or overfeeding.
Using immunohistochemistry, we studied Egr-1 expression specifically in a wide morphologic spectrum of pulmonary arteries in the lung tissue of 72 patients with different forms and stages of PAH, specifically idiopathic PAH (n = 18), advanced-stage congenital heart disease-associated PAH (PAH-CHD) (n = 21), early-stage PAH-CHD (n = 19) and non-neointimal hypoxic pulmonary hypertension (PH) (n = 4), and controls (n = 10).
Parkin substrates include two septins; SEPT4/CDCrel-2 which coaggregates with Alfa-synuclein as Lewy bodies in Parkinson's disease, and its closest homolog SEPT5/CDCrel-1/PNUTL1 whose overload with viral vector can rapidly eliminate dopamine neurons in rats.
After validation by Western blot and quantitative real-time PCR, the expressions of three proteins related to neurodegenerative disease, septin 5, Alfa-internexin, and Alfa-synuclein, were identified to be altered by MCLR exposure.
Interestingly, Septin 5, one of the genes isolated from HPAI H5N1-infected brain tissues has been reported to participate in the pathogenic process of Parkinson's disease.
A previous study successfully developed and validated a self-report BPD measure, the Minnesota Borderline Personality Disorder Scale (MBPD).
A previous study successfully developed and validated a BPD measure embedded within a normal trait measure, the Minnesota Borderline Personality Disorder Scale (MBPD).
This study was to investigate HSP70 expression in the peripheral lung tissues of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients and in human bronchial epithelial cells (16-HBE) exposed to cigarette smoke extract (CSE).
Sequencing analysis of the endogenous E2F4 gene in a series of colorectal cancer cell lines showed that the microsatellite-unstable cell line SW48 exhibited a serine deletion in this gene.
In conclusion, our data demonstrate that cancer-associated E2F4 mutations enhance the capacity of colorectal cancer cells to grow without anchorage, thereby contributing to tumor progression.
The inverse immunohistochemical relationship between E2F1 and E2F4 indicates a possible mechanistic interlink in colorectal cancer.
In an attempt to identify the role of E2F-4 as a potential mediator of cell proliferation, differentiation, tumorigenesis, and apoptosis in colorectal mucosa comparing with that of E2F-1, the authors examine 20 patients with human colon cancer and their corresponding histologically healthy mucosa by using immunohistochemical methods, computerized quantitative image analysis, and immunoblot analysis.
Eighteen colorectal cancer (CRC) patients from 13 kindreds meeting the Amsterdam criteria for HNPCC were analyzed and compared to sporadic CRC patients with MSI-H. We detected mutations of E2F-4 at the same repeat sequence in HNPCC.
Although the implication of vascular endothelial growth factor, angiopoietin-2, and C-X-C motif chemokine 10 has been suggested, the pathogenesis of systemic capillary leak syndrome remains unclear.
Microvascular dysfunction under septic shock is related to: increased capillary permeability that manifests as a breakdown of the microvascular endothelial barrier (factors which may contribute to capillary leak syndrome include endogenous proinflammatory cytokines, angiopoietin 2, vascular endothelial growth factor); arteriolar hyporesponsiveness to vasoconstrictors and vasodilators, the loss of adrenergic sensitivity and tone of smooth muscle cells lining the arterioles; loss of the anti-adhesive function of endothelial surfaces; decreased density of perfused capillaries (due to several contributing factors: decreased deformability of erythrocytes and neutrophils; activation of the clotting cascade with fibrin deposition and the formation of microthrombi; dysfunction of vascular autoregulatory mechanisms by nitric oxide; enhanced functional arteriovenous shunting of the microcirculation).
Further investigations of AL-1 as a promising new agent for treatment and/or prevention of diabetes are warranted.
In established cardiac ATTR amyloidosis, T1 elevation was not as high as in AL amyloidosis (AL 1,130 +/- 68 ms; p = 0.01).
We previously reported that EphA5 receptor-ephrinA5 interactions within the ventromedial hypothalamus (VMH) influence counterregulatory hormone responses during acute hypoglycemia in nondiabetic rats.
In this study, we examined whether recurrent hypoglycemia alters the capacity of the ephrinA5 ligand to activate VMH EphA5 receptors, and if so, whether these changes could contribute to pathogenesis of defective glucose counterregulation in response to a standard hypoglycemic stimulus.
The expression of ephrinA5, but not EphA5 receptors within the VMH, was reduced by antecedent recurrent hypoglycemia.
Activation of VMH EphA5 receptors via targeted microinjection of ephrinA5-Fc before a hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemic clamp study caused a reduction in the glucose infusion rate in nondiabetic rats exposed to recurrent hypoglycemia.
These data suggest that changes in ephrinA5/EphA5 interactions and synaptic plasticity within the VMH, a key glucose-sensing region in the brain, may contribute to the impairment in glucagon secretion and counterregulatory responses caused by recurrent hypoglycemia.
Activation of Beta-cell EphA5 receptors by its ligand ephrinA5 from adjacent Beta-cells has been reported to decrease insulin secretion during hypoglycemia.
Given the similarities between islet and ventromedial hypothalamus (VMH) glucose sensing, we tested the hypothesis that the EphA5/ephrinA5 system might function within the VMH during hypoglycemia to stimulate counterregulatory hormone release as well.
Local stimulation of VMH EphA5 receptors by ephrinA5-Fc or ephrinA5 overexpression increased, whereas knockdown of VMH ephrinA5 reduced counterregulatory responses during hypoglycemia.
Overexpression of VMH ephrinA5 transiently increased local glutamate concentrations, whereas ephrinA5 knockdown produced profound suppression of VMH interstitial fluid glutamine concentrations in the basal state and during hypoglycemia.
Changes in ephrinA5/EphA5 interactions within the VMH, a key brain glucose-sensing region, act in concert with islets to restore glucose homeostasis during acute hypoglycemia, and its effect on counterregulation may be mediated by changes in glutamate/glutamine cycling.
Fractionation of dichloromethane (DCM) molecules with different chlorine isotopes by aerobic methylobacteria Methylobacterium dichloromethanicum DM4 and Albibacter nethylovorans DM10; cell-free extract of strain DM4; and transconjugant Methylobacterium evtorquens Al1/pME 8220, expressing the dcmA gene for DCM dehalogenase but unable to grow on DCM, was studied.
We also describe the first RCC with a DVL2-TFE3 gene fusion, in addition to an extrarenal pigmented PEComa with a NONO-TFE3 gene fusion.
Furthermore, among neoplasms with the SFPQ-TFE3, NONO-TFE3, DVL2-TFE3, and ASPL-TFE3 gene fusions, the RCCs are almost always PAX8 positive, cathepsin K negative by immunohistochemistry, whereas the mesenchymal counterparts (Xp11 translocation PEComas, melanotic Xp11 translocation renal cancers, and alveolar soft part sarcoma) are PAX8 negative, cathepsin K positive.
The compound was further tested in vitro for acetylation of histone H4 and other non-histone proteins, and in vivo in a colon carcinoma model, showing significant proapoptotic and antitumor activities.
As a proof-of-principle, we have identified cytochrome C and Histone H4 as two of the predominant protein species in the 3D colon carcinoma cultures.
Double 2-mm core tissue microarrays were made from 261 paraffin-embedded gastric adenocarcinoma samples and examined by immunohistochemistry for histone H3 lysine 9 (H3K9) acetylation and trimethylation, histone H4 lysine 16 acetylation, and histone H4 lysine 20 trimethylation.
This study aimed to investigate the expression of NOR1 in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) tissue and its relationship with prognosis.
Oxidored-nitro domain-containing protein 1 (NOR1) expression levels are greater in hepatitis, cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma samples compared with from normal liver samples.
In conclusion, these results indicate that NOR1 may be involved in the progression of HCC and thus may be a potential target for the treatment of liver cancer.
To date, several studies have revealed that gene mutations of the transporters are likely to be associated with some diseases; however, there are no data concerning the genetic polymorphism of the hOSCP1 gene in Japanese patients with non-viral liver carcinoma (LC).
The nitroreductase oxidored-nitro domain containing protein 1 (NOR1) gene may be involved in the chemical carcinogenesis of hepatic cancer and nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC).
Using cDNA microarrays and quantitative real-time PCR, we previously discovered that NOR1 increases the expression of growth factor receptor-bound protein 2 (Grb2) mRNA by 4.8-fold in the human hepatocellular carcinoma cell line HepG2.
In addition, expression of human NOR1 protein in different normal and cancerous human tissues was analyzed via search of the human RNA and protein databases; the data showed that although most malignant cells weakly stained or were negative for NOR1 expression, the liver cancer cells displayed moderate to strong expression of NOR1.
These data suggested that NOR1 might serve as a cancer/testis/brain antigen in cells, and that altered NOR1 expression in liver cancer may help us to elucidate the functions of NOR1 protein in liver carcinogenesis.
Significant allelic associations with SLE were detected in European Americans (EA) and African Americans (AA), which could be attributed to an intronic CFH SNP (rs6677604, in intron 11, P(meta) = 6.6x10(-8), OR = 1.18) and an intergenic SNP between CFHR1 and CFHR4 (rs16840639, P(meta) = 2.9x10(-7), OR = 1.17) rather than to previously identified disease-associated CFH exonic SNPs, including I62V, Y402H, A474A, and D936E.
Gastroschisis and omphalocele are the most common fetal abdominal wall defects (AWDs).
AWDs were identified through gastroschisis and omphalocele checkboxes from publicly available US Natality data (2006 to 2010).
The angiogenic proteins vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and prokineticin1 (PROK1) proteins are considered important in colorectal cancer, the relationship between their simultaneous expression and prognosis was investigated in the present study.
VEGF and PROK1 expression in 620 primary human colorectal cancer lesions was confirmed via immunohistochemical staining with anti-VEGF and anti-PROK1 antibodies, and the correlation between the expression of these 2 proteins and recurrence/prognosis were investigated.
The prognosis was poorer in colorectal cancers that expressed both PROK1 and VEGF relative to the cases that expressed only 1 protein, and the expression of both proteins was found to be an independent prognostic factor.
Two angiogenic growth factors, in particular, Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and Prokineticin1(PROK1), are considered to have an important role in hematogenous metastasis of colorectal cancer.
Accordingly, we report our findings on the importance of the anti-tumor efffect by inhibiting these two factors in human colorectal cancer.When the culture fluid of Colorectal cancer cell lines(DLD-1, HCT116, and LoVo) with high levels of VEGF/PROK1 expression was injected subcutaneously into mice, the culture fluid increased subcutaneous angiogenesis.
Also, tumor masses were produced in mice by subcutaneously embedding colorectal cancer cells with high levels VEGF/PROK1 expression.
When both anti-PROK1 and anti-VEGF antibodies were simultaneously applied, tumor formation and peritumoral angiogenesis were strongly suppressed, compared with when either anti-PROK1 antibody or anti-VEGF antibody was applied alone.Simultaneous targeting of both angiogenic growth factors (VEGF/PROK1) may prove more useful in colorectal cancer.
The current study established the anti-PROK1 monoclonal antibody (mAb) and examined the relationship between the expression of PROK1 protein and human colorectal cancer.
The expression of PROK1 protein was assessed in 620 resected sporadic colorectal cancer tissue samples by immunohistochemical staining with in-house-developed human PROK1 mAb to investigate the relationship of PROK1 expression to clinicopathologic factors, recurrence, and survival rate and to evaluate its prognostic significance.
The expression of PROK1 protein was detected in 36 % (223/620) of human primary colorectal cancer lesions but no in the healthy mucosa adjacent to the colorectal cancer lesions.
The expression of PROK1 protein was identified for the first time as a new prognostic factor in colorectal cancer.
Here we investigated how the anti-PROK1 monoclonal antibody (mAb; established by our department) would affect the high-PROK1-expressing colorectal cancer (CRC) cells in vitro and vivo.
PROK1 expression was not observed in healthy gastrointestinal mucosa, but was observed in the primary lesions in 23 out of 98 (31.6%) patients with colorectal cancer, 19 out of 55 (34.5%) patients with gastric cancer, and 5 of 10 (50%) patients with cancer of the small intestine.
Endocrine gland-derived vascular endothelial growth factor (EG-VEGF) has             recently been identified as one of the vascular endothelial growth factors, and             it is considered that the overexpression of EG-VEGF in colon cancer is related             to hepatic metastasis.
In this study, we report our recent novel findings of the             involvement of EG-VEGF in cell invasion of colon cancer cells.
Finally, the EG-VEGF receptor on the colon cancer cell membrane             was blocked by anti-PK-R1 and -PK-R2 antibodies to study whether cell invasion             ability would be altered.
In colon cancer cell lines where the expression of PK-R1             and 2 was confirmed, stimulation with EG-VEGF increased cell invasion a maximum             of ~3-5 times.
The study showed that the EG-VEGF             protein may act on MMP-2, -7 and -9 via PK-R2 to strengthen cell invasion ability             in colon cancer cell lines.
To study the implication of prokineticin 1 (PK1/EG-VEGF) and prokineticin 2 (PK2/Bv8) in hepatocellular carcinoma angiogenesis.
